Anal cancer is a type of cancer that starts in the anus. Cancer starts when cells in the body begin to grow out of control. To learn more about how cancers start and spread, see What Is Cancer?
Normal structure and function of the anus
The anus is the opening at the lower end of the intestines. It's where the end of the intestines connect to the outside of the body.
As food is digested, it passes from the stomach to the small intestine. It then moves from the small intestine into the main part of the large intestine (called the colon). The colon absorbs water and salt from the digested food. The waste matter that's left after going through the colon is known as feces or stool. Stool is stored in the last part of the large intestine, called the rectum. From there, stool is passed out of the body through the anus as a bowel movement.Anal cancer is fairly rare – much less common than cancer of the colon or rectum. The American Cancer Society estimates for anal cancer in the United States for 2024 are:

About 10,540 new cases (3,360 in men and 7,180 in women)
About 2,190 deaths (1,000 in men and 1,190 in women)

The number of new anal cancer cases has been rising for many years. Anal cancer is rare in people younger than 35 and is found mainly in older adults, with an average age being in the early 60s. It is also more common in White women and Black men. 
The risk of being diagnosed with anal cancer during one’s lifetime is about 1 in 500. The risk is higher in people with certain risk factors for anal cancer.
The number of people who die from anal cancer each year has been rising, but treatment for anal cancer is often very effective, and many patients with this cancer can be cured. But anal cancer can be a serious condition. For information on survival, see Survival Rates by Stage of Anal Cancer.
Visit the American Cancer Society’s Cancer Statistics Center for more key statistics.Important research into anal cancer is now under way in many hospitals, medical centers, and other institutions around the world. Each year, scientists use clinical trials to find out more about what causes this disease, how to prevent it, and how to better treat it.
Looking at changes in anal cancer cells
We know that human papillomavirus (HPV) is a major cause of anal cancer. Researchers are now looking at how HPV affects molecules inside anal cells to cause them to become cancer. Improved understanding of the molecular changes inside anal cancer cells may lead to ways to prevent it and is also expected to help scientists find treatments using drugs that target these changes. Some clinical trials are studying drugs for this.
Screening for anal cancer
Ongoing research is being done on the value of screening tests for anal cancer, especially in people with major risk factors, such as HIV infection. (Screening is checking for a disease in people who don't have symptoms of it.) The test studied most is anal cytology, sometimes called the anal Pap test. This test may help find anal cancer when it's small, before it's causing symptoms and when it's easier to treat. Studies are also looking at whether the anal Pap test can help find anal pre-cancer (called anal intraepithelial neoplasia, or AIN), so it can be treated before cancer even develops. 
Treatment
Lasers
Better treatments for anal cancer with fewer side effects and long-term changes in body function are areas of active research. For instance, photodynamic therapy is being looked at to see if it can help treat pre-cancer changes.
Immunotherapy
Immunotherapy is treatment that boosts the body’s immune response against cancer cells. Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) and nivolumab (Opdivo) are immunotherapy drugs now being used in people with advanced anal cancer that has grown during at least one prior chemotherapy treatment. Different kinds of immunotherapy drugs are also being studied as an option for treating anal cancers that have not spread to distant organs but cannot be removed with surgery or that have not spread but are at high risk of coming back after chemoradiation and surgery. Another area of research is the combination of immunotherapy with chemotherapy.
Radiation therapy
Radiation therapy is a common treatment for anal cancer. Doctors are looking at ways to give external radiation including proton therapy more accurately and effectively to decrease the effects on normal healthy tissues. Other research is being done to learn about the possible benefits of combining chemotherapy with internal radiation therapy (brachytherapy) to treat anal cancer that has come back or gotten worse.
Combining lower doses of chemotherapy with radiation is another area of interest. Giving lower doses of chemo with radiation might help lessen side effects while still shrinking the cancer. Different drug combinations with radiation are being tested in clinical trials.
HPV vaccines
HPV vaccines are recommended for children and certain young adults to help prevent HPV infection that can cause some types of cancer, but the vaccines don't treat HPV infections that people already have. Doctors are looking at whether HPV vaccines might be used to help treat high-grade pre-cancers and keep them from becoming cancer especially in people with HIV. These vaccines may help the immune system attack pre-cancers and even cancers that contain HPV.A risk factor is anything that increases your chance of getting a disease such as cancer. Different cancers have different risk factors. Some risk factors, like smoking or diet, can be changed. Others, like a person’s age or family history, cannot.
Several factors can affect your risk of anal cancer. But having a risk factor, or even several risk factors, does not mean that you will get cancer. Many people with risk factors will never develop anal cancer, while others with this disease may have few or no known risk factors.
HPV (human papillomavirus) infection
Infection by the human papillomavirus (HPV) is the most important risk factor for anal cancer. Most squamous cell anal cancers are linked to infection with HPV. HPV is a group of more than 150 related viruses, the same group of viruses that causes cervical cancer, as well as other kinds of cancer. In fact, women with a history of cervical cancer (or pre-cancer) have an increased risk of anal cancer.

HPV can infect cells on the surface of the skin, and those lining the genitals, anus, mouth and throat, but not the blood or internal organs such as the heart or lungs.
HPV can spread from one person to another during skin-to-skin contact. One way HPV spreads is through sexual activity, including vaginal, anal, and even oral sex.
Different types of HPV cause warts on different parts of the body. Some cause common warts on the hands and feet; others tend to cause warts on the lips or tongue.

Infection with HPV is common, and in most cases, the body can clear the infection by itself. Sometimes, however, the infection does not go away and becomes chronic. Chronic infection, especially when it is caused by certain high-risk HPV types, can eventually cause certain cancers, such as anal cancer.
Certain types of HPV are called high-risk because they are strongly linked to cancers including anal cancer, as well as cancer of the cervix, vulva, and vagina in women, penile cancer in men, and cancers of the anus, mouth, and throat in both men and women. The high-risk subtype most likely to cause anal cancer is HPV-16. Another high-risk type is HPV-18, but this is seen less often with anal cancer.
Other types of HPV may cause warts in or around the anal area and on the female and male genital organs. These are called low-risk types of HPV because they are seldom linked to cancer.
Although there is currently no cure for HPV infection, there are ways to treat the warts and abnormal cell growth that HPV causes. Also, HPV vaccines are available to help prevent infection by certain types of HPV and some of the cancers linked to those types.
Anal warts
People who have had anal warts are more likely to get anal cancer. This is because people who are infected with HPV subtypes that cause anal and genital warts are also more likely to be infected with HPV subtypes that cause anal cancer.
Having certain other cancers
Women who have had cancer of the cervix, vagina, or vulva are at increased risk of anal cancer. This is probably because these cancers are also caused by infection with HPV.
HIV infection
People infected with HIV (the human immunodeficiency virus), the virus that causes AIDS, are much more likely to get anal cancer than those not infected with this virus. For more information see HIV Infection, AIDS, and Cancer.
Sexual activity
Having multiple sex partners increases the risk of infection with HIV and HPV. It also increases the risk of anal cancer.
Receptive anal sex also increases the risk of anal cancer in both men and women. Because of this, men who have sex with men have a high risk of this cancer.
Smoking
Smoking increases the risk of anal cancer. The higher a person's pack-year history of smoking, the higher their risk of developing anal cancer.  People who currently smoke are more likely to have cancer of the anus compared with people who do not smoke or have quit smoking. Quitting smoking seems to reduce the risk.
Lowered immunity
Higher rates of anal cancer occur among people with reduced immunity, such as people with AIDS or people who have had an organ transplant and must take medicines that suppress their immune system.
Sex and race/ethnicity
Anal cancer is more common in White women and Black men.Researchers have found some risk factors that increase a person’s risk of anal cancer, but the exact cause of anal cancer is not known. It’s also important to remember that some people with anal cancers do not have any known risk factors and the causes of their cancers are also unknown.
HPV infection
Most anal cancers seem to be linked to infection with HPV (the human papillomavirus. While HPV infection seems to be important in the development of anal cancer, the vast majority of people with HPV infections do not get anal cancer.
A great deal of research is now being done to learn how HPV might cause anal cancer. There is good evidence that HPV causes many anal squamous cell carcinomas. But the role of this virus in causing anal adenocarcinomas is less certain.
More than 150 subtypes of HPV have been found. The subtype known as HPV-16 is often found in squamous cell carcinoma and is also found in some anal warts. Another subtype, HPV-18, is found less often. Most anal warts are caused by HPV-6 and HPV-11. Warts containing HPV-6 or HPV-11 are much less likely to become cancer than those containing HPV-16.
HPV makes proteins (E6 and E7) that can shut down 2 important tumor suppressor proteins in normal cells. These proteins – p53 and Rb – normally work to keep cells from growing out of control. When these proteins are not active, cells are more likely to become cancer.
Lowered immunity
When the body is less able to fight off infections, viruses like HPV can become more active, which might trigger the development of anal cancer. HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, weakens the body’s immune system, as can medicines used to prevent rejection in patients with organ transplants.
Smoking
Most people know that smoking is the main cause of lung cancer. But the cancer-causing chemicals in tobacco smoke can travel from the lungs to the rest of the body, causing other types of cancer as well. Smoking also seems to make the immune system less effective in fighting HPV infections. Many studies have noted an increased rate of anal cancer in people who smoke, and the effect of smoking is especially important in people with other risk factors for anal cancer.Since the cause of many cases of anal cancer is unknown, it’s not possible to prevent this disease completely. But there are things you can do that might lower your risk of anal cancer.
HPV vaccines
Infection with HPV increases the risk of anal cancer. HPV infection can be present for years without causing any symptoms, so even if warts are not seen by the naked eye, that can't be used to tell if someone has HPV. Even when someone does not have warts (or any other symptom), they can still be infected with HPV and pass it on to somebody else.
Vaccines are available that protect against certain HPV infections. They protect against infection with HPV subtypes 16 and 18. Some can also protect against infections with other HPV subtypes, including some types that cause anal and genital warts.
These vaccines can only be used to help prevent HPV infection – they do not help treat an existing infection. To work best, the vaccine should be given to children at a young age before they become sexually active.
To learn more, see HPV Vaccines.
Not smoking
Smoking is a known risk factor for anal cancer. Stopping smoking greatly reduces the risk of developing anal cancer and many other cancers.
Treating HIV
For people infected with HIV, it’s very important to take medicines (known as highly active antiretroviral therapy, or HAART) to help keep the HIV infection under control and prevent it from progressing to AIDS. This can also lower the risk of long-term HPV infection and anal intraepithelial neoplasia (a kind of anal pre-cancer), which might help lower the risk of anal cancer. Compared to other HIV-related cancers, the number of people with HIV who have developed anal cancer while on HAART has actually increased over the years. The reasons for this is unknown, but may be because people with HIV on HAART are living longer. 
Condom use
Condoms may provide some protection against HPV (and HIV), but they do not prevent infection completely. Given this, it is unclear if condom use can reduce the risk of anal cancer.  
One study found that when condoms are used correctly they can lower the genital HPV infection rate in women – but they must be used every time sex occurs. This study did not look at the effect of condom use on anal HPV infection.
Condoms cannot protect completely because they do not cover every possible HPV-infected area of the body, such as skin of the genital or anal area. HPV can still be passed from one person to another by skin to skin contact with an HPV-infected area of the body that is not covered by a condom. Still, condoms may provide some protection against HPV. Male condom use also seems to help genital HPV infections clear (go away) faster.
Condom use is also important because it can help protect against AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases that can be passed on through some body fluids.Many anal cancers can be found early. Early anal cancers often have signs and symptoms that lead people to see a doctor. Unfortunately, some anal cancers may not cause symptoms until they reach an advanced stage. Other anal cancers can cause symptoms like those of diseases other than cancer. This may delay their diagnosis.
Anal cancers develop in a part of the digestive tract that your doctor can easily see and get to. A digital rectal exam (DRE) can find some cases of anal cancer early. In this exam, the doctor inserts a gloved, lubricated finger into the anus to feel for unusual lumps or growths. This test is sometimes used to look for prostate cancer in men (because the prostate gland can be felt through the rectum). The rectal exam is also done routinely as part of a pelvic exam on women.
The odds that anal cancer can be found early depend on the location and type of the cancer. Cancers that begin higher up in the anal canal are less likely to cause symptoms and be found early. Anal melanomas tend to spread earlier than other cancers, making them harder to diagnose them early.
Screening people at high risk
Looking for a disease like cancer in someone with no symptoms is called screening. The goal of screening is to find cancer at an early stage, when treatment is likely to be most helpful. Anal cancer is not common in the United States, so screening the general public for anal cancer is not widely recommended at this time.
Still, some people at increased risk for anal intraepithelial neoplasia (AIN, a potentially pre-cancerous condition) and anal cancer might benefit from screening. This includes men who have sex with men (regardless of HIV status), women who have had cervical cancer, vaginal cancer, or vulvar cancer, anyone who is HIV-positive, and anyone who is immunocompromised (such as people who have received an organ transplant or are on long-term steroids). Some experts also recommend screening for anyone with a history of anal warts and women older than 45 years old who are HPV 16 positive.
For these people, some experts recommend screening with regular anal cytology testing (also known as an anal Pap test or anal Pap smear because it is much like a Pap test for cervical cancer). For an anal Pap test, the anal lining is swabbed, and cells that come off on the swab are looked at closely in the lab. The anal Pap test can then be followed by a DRE or a procedure called an anoscopy. 
The anal Pap test has not been studied enough to know how often it should be done, or if it actually reduces the risk of anal cancer by catching AIN early. Some experts recommend that the test be done every year in at-risk people who are HIV-positive, and every 2 to 3 years in at-risk people who are HIV-negative. But there is no widespread agreement on the best screening schedule, or even exactly which groups of people can benefit from screening.
Patients with positive results on an anal Pap test should be referred for a biopsy. If AIN is found on the biopsy, it might need to be treated (especially if it is high-grade).Sometimes anal cancer causes no symptoms at all. But bleeding is often the first sign of the disease. The bleeding is usually minor. At first, most people assume the bleeding is caused by hemorrhoids (painful, swollen veins in the anus and rectum that may bleed). Hemorrhoids are a benign and fairly common cause of rectal bleeding.
Important symptoms of anal cancer include:

Bleeding from the rectum
Itching in or around the rectum
A lump or mass at the anal opening
Pain or a feeling of fullness in the anal area
Narrowing of stool or other changes in bowel movements
Abnormal discharge from the anus
Incontinence of stool (loss of bowel control)
Swollen lymph nodes in the anal or groin areas

Most often these types of symptoms are more likely to be caused by benign (non-cancer) conditions, like hemorrhoids, anal fissures, or anal warts. Still, if you have any of these symptoms, it’s important to have them checked by a doctor so that the cause can be found and treated, if needed.Some people at high risk for anal cancer are diagnosed by screening tests, such as the digital rectal exam and/or anal Pap test (described in Can Anal Cancer Be Found Early?). Sometimes a doctor will find anal cancer during a routine physical exam or during a minor procedure, such as removing a hemorrhoid. Treating cancers found this way is often very effective because the tumors are found early. (This means they're small and haven't spread.) But most often anal cancers are found because of signs or symptoms a person is having.
If anal cancer is suspected, exams and tests will be needed to confirm the diagnosis. If cancer is found, more tests will be done to help determine the extent (stage) of the cancer.
Medical history and physical exam
If you have symptoms that might be caused by anal cancer, the doctor will ask about your medical history to check for possible risk factors and learn more about your symptoms.
Your doctor will also examine you to look for signs of anal cancer or other health problems. For women, this will include a pelvic exam and Pap test. A digital rectal exam will probably be done, too. (This is when the doctor puts a gloved, lubricated finger into your anus and rectum to feel for lumps or other changes). Attention will also be focused on the groin area to see if any large lymph nodes are felt.  
If problems or changes are found, your doctor might do other exams or tests to help find the cause. If you're being seen by your primary care doctor, you might be referred to a specialist such as a colorectal surgeon or a gastroenterologist (doctors specializing in diseases of the colon, rectum, and anus) for more tests and, if needed, treatment.
Anoscopy
For anoscopy the doctor uses a short, hollow, firm tube called an anoscope. It's 3 to 4 inches long and about 1 inch in diameter and may have a light on the end of it. The doctor coats the anoscope with a gel and then gently pushes it into the anus and lower rectum. By shining a light into this tube, the doctor has a clear view of the lining of the lower rectum and anus. Samples from abnormal areas (a biopsy) can be taken at the same time. You will be awake during this test, but it doesn't usually hurt.
Rigid proctosigmoidoscopy
The rigid proctosigmoidoscope is a lot like an anoscope, except that it's longer (about 10 inches long). It lets the doctor see the anus, rectum, and the lower part of the sigmoid colon. You might need to take laxatives or have an enema before this test to make sure your bowels are empty so the doctor can see any abnormal areas clearly.
Endoscopy
Endoscopy uses a thin, flexible tube with a light and tiny video camera on the end to look inside part of the body. Many types of endoscopy can be used to look for the cause of anal symptoms. A common type is a colonoscopy that can see the anus, rectum, and entire colon. It can also be used to get tissue samples from inside the anal canal, the rectum, and colon (described below under Biopsy). A flexible sigmoidoscopy might be done instead of a colonoscopy, but this only looks at the anal canal, rectum, and lower part of the colon. Drugs may be used to make you sleepy during these tests.
Biopsy
If a change or growth is seen during an endoscopic exam, your doctor will need to take out a piece of it to see if it's cancer. This is called a biopsy. If the growth is in the anal canal, this can often be done through the scope itself. Drugs may be used to numb the area before the biopsy is taken. Then, a small piece of the tissue is cut out and sent to the lab. If the tumor is very small, your doctor might try to remove the entire tumor during the biopsy.
A doctor called a pathologist will look at the tissue sample under a microscope. If there is cancer, the pathologist will send back a report with the cell type and other details of the cancer, including whether it is related to an HPV infection.
Anal cancer sometimes spreads to nearby lymph nodes (bean-sized collections of immune system cells). Swollen lymph nodes in the groin can be a sign that cancer has spread. Lymph nodes may also become swollen from an infection. Biopsies may be needed to check for cancer spread to nearby lymph nodes.
There are many different ways to do a biopsy. A type called fine-needle aspiration (FNA) is often used to check lymph nodes that might have cancer in them. To do this, a small sample of tissue is taken out of the lymph node using a thin, hollow needle. A pathologist checks this tissue for cancer cells. If cancer is found in a lymph node, surgery may be done to remove the lymph nodes in that area.
Blood tests
HIV test: If you have risk factors for HIV, your doctor might order a blood test to check for it. This information is important because HIV positive patients might need to start treatment for HIV so that their immune system is as normal as possible, before starting cancer treatment.
Imaging tests
Imaging tests use x-rays, magnetic fields, sound waves, or radioactive substances to create pictures of the inside of your body. Imaging tests might be done for a number of reasons both before and after a diagnosis of anal cancer, including:

To help find cancer
To learn how far cancer has spread
To help see if treatment is working
To look for signs of cancer coming back after treatment

Ultrasound
Ultrasound uses sound waves to make pictures of internal organs or masses. This test can be used to see how deep the cancer has grown into the tissues near the anus.
For most ultrasound exams a wand-like transducer is moved around on the skin. But for anal cancer, the transducer is put into the rectum. This is called a transrectal or endorectal ultrasound. The test can be uncomfortable, but it usually doesn't hurt.
Computed tomography (CT) scan
CT scans use x-rays to make detailed cross-sectional images of your body. This is a common test for people with anal cancer. This test can help tell if the cancer has spread into the lymph nodes or to other parts of the body, such as the liver, lungs, or other organs.
CT-guided needle biopsy: A CT scan can also be used to guide a biopsy needle right into an area that could be cancer.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
MRI scans use radio waves and strong magnets instead of x-rays. A contrast material called gadolinium may be injected into a vein before the scan to see details better.
This test is sometimes used to see if nearby lymph nodes are enlarged, which might be a sign the cancer has spread there. MRI can also be used to look at abnormal areas in the liver or the brain and spinal cord that could be cancer spread. 
Chest x-ray
A regular x-ray might be done to find out if the cancer has spread to the lungs. It usually isn’t needed if a CT scan of the chest is done.
Positron emission tomography (PET) scan
For a PET scan, a slightly radioactive form of sugar (known as FDG) is injected into your blood. It collects mainly in cancer cells, which makes the cancer show up on the PET scan.
PET/CT scan: A CT scan can show more details than a PET scan, so a PET scan is often combined with a CT scan using a special machine that can do both at the same time. This lets the doctor compare areas of higher radioactivity on the PET scan with the more detailed image of that area on the CT scan.
PET/CT scans can be useful:

If your doctor thinks the cancer might have spread but doesn’t know where. They can show spread of cancer to the liver, bones, lymph nodes in the pelvis, or other organs. They are not as useful for looking at the brain or spinal cord.
In staging anal cancer when you are first diagnosed. But their role in checking whether treatment is working or after completion of treatment is unproven. Most doctors do not recommend PET/CT scans for routine follow up after anal cancer treatment, and most often will order CT or MRI scans to watch for cancer recurrence.After someone is diagnosed with anal cancer, doctors will try to figure out if it has spread, and if so, how far. This process is called staging. The stage of a cancer describes how much cancer is in the body. It helps determine how serious the cancer is and how best to treat it. Doctors also use a cancer's stage when talking about survival statistics.
The stages of anal cancer range from stage I (1) through IV (4). As a rule, the lower the number, the less the cancer has spread. A higher number, such as stage IV, means cancer has spread more. And within a stage, an earlier letter means a lower stage. Although each person’s cancer experience is unique, cancers with similar stages tend to have a similar outlook and are often treated in much the same way.
How is the stage determined?
The staging system most often used for anal cancer is the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) TNM system, which is based on 3 key pieces of information:

The extent of the main (primary) tumor (T): What is the size of the tumor? Has it grown into nearby structures or organs?
The spread to nearby lymph nodes (N): Has the cancer spread to nearby lymph nodes?
The spread (metastasis) to distant sites (M): Has the cancer spread to distant lymph nodes or distant organs such as the liver or lungs?

Numbers or letters after T, N, and M provide more details about each of these factors. Higher numbers mean the cancer is more advanced. Once a person’s T, N, and M categories have been determined, this information is combined in a process called stage grouping to assign an overall stage. For more information see Cancer Staging.
Anal cancer is usually staged based on the results of a physical exam, biopsy, and imaging tests. This is called a clinical stage. If surgery is done, the pathologic stage (also called the surgical stage) is determined by examining tissue removed during an operation.
The system described below is the most recent AJCC staging system for anal cancer, effective as of January 2023. It is used for tumors in the anal canal and perianal area (also called the anal margin).
Cancer staging can be complex, so ask your doctor to explain it to you in a way you understand.



AJCC Stage
Stage grouping
Stage description*


I
T1 N0 M0
The cancer is no more than 2 cm (about 4/5 inch) across (T1). It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes (N0) or to distant parts of the body (M0).


IIA
T2 N0 M0
The cancer is more than 2 cm (about 4/5 inch) but not more than 5 cm (about 2 inches) across (T2). The cancer has not spread to nearby lymph nodes (N0) or to distant parts of the body (M0).


IIB
T1-T2 N1 M0
The cancer is no more than 5 cm (about 2 inches) across (T1 or T2) AND it has spread to lymph nodes near the rectum (N1) but not to distant parts of the body (M0).


  IIIA    
T3 N0 M0
The cancer is larger than 5 cm (about 2 inches) across (T3). It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes (N0) or to distant parts of the body (M0).


OR


T3 N1 M0
The cancer is larger than 5 cm (about 2 inches) across (T3) AND it has spread to lymph nodes near the rectum (N1) but not to distant parts of the body (M0). 


IIIB
T4 N0 M0
The cancer is any size and is growing into nearby organ(s), such as the vagina, urethra (the tube that carries urine out of the bladder), prostate gland, or bladder (T4). It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes (N0) or to distant parts of the body (M0).


IIIC
T4 N1 M0
The cancer is any size and is growing into nearby organ(s), such as the vagina, urethra (the tube that carries urine out of the bladder), prostate gland, or bladder (T4) AND it has spread to lymph nodes near the rectum (N1) but not to distant parts of the body (M0).


IV
Any T Any N M1
The cancer can be any size and may or may not have grown into nearby organs (any T). It may or may not have spread to nearby lymph nodes (any N). It has spread to distant organs, such as the liver or lungs (M1).



*The following additional categories are not listed on the table above:

TX: Main tumor cannot be assessed due to lack of information.
T0: No evidence of a primary tumor.
NX: Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed due to lack of information.Survival rates can give you an idea of what percentage of people with the same type and stage of cancer are still alive a certain amount of time (usually 5 years) after they were diagnosed. They can’t tell you how long you will live, but they may help give you a better understanding of how likely it is that your treatment will be successful.
Keep in mind that survival rates are estimates and are often based on previous outcomes of large numbers of people who had a specific cancer, but they can’t predict what will happen in any particular person’s case. These statistics can be confusing and may lead you to have more questions. Ask your doctor how these numbers may apply to you. 
What is a 5-year relative survival rate?
A relative survival rate compares people with the same type and stage of cancer to people in the overall population. For example, if the 5-year relative survival rate for a specific stage of anal cancer is 80%, it means that people who have that cancer are, on average, about 80% as likely as people who don’t have that cancer to live for at least 5 years after being diagnosed.
Where do these numbers come from?
The American Cancer Society relies on information from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database, maintained by the National Cancer Institute (NCI), to provide survival statistics for different types of cancer.
The SEER database tracks 5-year relative survival rates for anal cancer in the United States, based on how far the cancer has spread. The SEER database, however, does not group cancers by AJCC TNM stages (stage 1, stage 2, stage 3, etc.). Instead, it groups cancers into localized, regional, and distant stages:

Localized: There is no sign that the cancer has spread outside of the anal area.
Regional: The cancer has spread outside the anal area to nearby structures or lymph nodes.
Distant: The cancer has spread to distant parts of the body, such as the liver or lungs.

5-year relative survival rates for anal cancer
These numbers are based on people diagnosed with anal cancer between 2012 and 2018.



SEER* stage
5-year relative survival rate


Localized
83%


Regional
67%


Distant
36%


All SEER stages combined
70%



*SEER = Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results
Understanding the numbers

These numbers apply only to the stage of the cancer when it is first diagnosed. They do not apply later on if the cancer grows, spreads, or comes back after treatment.
These numbers don’t take everything into account. Survival rates are grouped based on how far the cancer has spread. But other factors, such as your age and overall health, the type of anal cancer you have, and how well the cancer responds to treatment, can also affect your outlook.
People now being diagnosed with anal cancer may have a better outlook than these numbers show. Treatments improve over time, and these numbers are based on people who were diagnosed and treated at least five years earlier.It's important to have honest, open discussions with your cancer care team. They want to answer all your questions, so that you can make informed treatment and life decisions. For instance, consider these questions:
When you’re told you have anal cancer

What kind of anal cancer do I have?
Has my cancer spread beyond where it started?
What is the stage of my cancer and what does this mean in my case?
Will I need other tests before we can decide on treatment?
Will I need to see other doctors?
If I’m concerned about the costs and insurance coverage for my diagnosis and treatment, who can help me?

When deciding on a treatment plan

How much experience do you have treating this type of cancer?
Should I get a second opinion? How do I do that? Can you recommend someone or a cancer center?
What are my treatment choices?
What treatment would you recommend for me? Why?
What is the goal of each treatment?
What are the chances my cancer can be cured with these options?
How quickly do I need to decide on treatment?
What should I do to be ready for treatment?
How long will treatment last? What will it be like? Where will it be done?
What are the risks or side effects of the treatments you suggest? How long are they likely to last?
Will I need to have a colostomy?
How soon do I need to start treatment?
Will treatment affect my daily activities?
What would my options be if the treatment doesn't work or if the cancer comes back after treatment?

During treatment

How will we know if the treatment is working?
Is there anything I can do to help manage side effects?
What symptoms or side effects should I tell you about right away?
How can I reach you on nights, holidays, or weekends?
Do I need to change what I eat during treatment?
Are there any limits on what I can do?
Can you suggest a mental health professional I can see if I start to feel overwhelmed, depressed, or distressed?

After treatment

Are there any limits on what I can do?
What symptoms should I watch for?
What kind of exercise should I do now?
What type of follow-up will I need after treatment?
How often will I need to have follow-up exams and imaging tests?
Will I need any blood tests?
How will we know if the cancer has come back? What should I watch for?
What will my options be if the cancer comes back?
How soon after treatment can I return to my normal activities, such as work, school, exercise, or sex?

Along with these sample questions, be sure to write down some of your own. For instance, you might want more information about recovery times. Or you might want to ask if you qualify for a clinical trial.
Doctors are not the only ones who can provide you with information. Other health care professionals, such as nurses and social workers, can also answer some of your questions. You can find out more about communicating with your health care team in The Doctor-Patient Relationship.In most cases, surgery is not the first treatment used for anal cancer. For people who do need surgery, the type of operation depends on the type and location of the tumor.
Local resection
A local resection is an operation that removes only the tumor, plus a small amount of normal tissue around the tumor. It's most often used to treat cancers of the perianal area (also called the anal margin) if the tumor is small and has not spread to nearby tissues or lymph nodes.
In most cases, local resection saves the sphincter muscles that keep stool from coming out until they relax during a bowel movement. This allows a person to move their bowels normally after the surgery.
Abdominoperineal resection
In the past, an abdominoperineal resection (APR) was a common treatment for anal cancer, but doctors have found that it can almost always be avoided by using radiation therapy and chemotherapy instead. Today, APR is used only if other treatments don’t work or if the cancer comes back after treatment.
An APR is a major operation. The surgeon makes one incision (cut) in the abdomen (belly), and another around the anus to remove the anus, the rectum, and the sigmoid colon. The surgeon may also take out some of the nearby lymph nodes in the groin area (called a lymph node dissection), though this can also be done later.
The anus (and the anal sphincter) is removed, so a new opening needs to be made for stool leave the body. To do this, the end of the colon is attached to a small hole (called a stoma) made on the abdomen. A bag to collect stool sticks to the body over the opening. This is called a colostomy.
Possible risks and side effects of surgery
Potential side effects of surgery depend on many things, including the extent of the operation and the person’s health before surgery. Most people will have at least some pain after the operation, but it usually can be controlled with medicines. Other problems can include reactions to anesthesia, damage to nearby organs, bleeding, blood clots in the legs, and infection.
APR tends to cause more side effects, many of which are long-lasting. For instance, after an APR, you might develop scar tissue (called adhesions) in your belly that can cause organs or tissues to stick together. This might cause pain or problems with food moving through the bowels, which can lead to digestive problems. 
People also need a permanent colostomy after an APR. This can take some time to get used to and may mean some lifestyle changes.
An APR can sometimes damage the ureters or urethra (tubes that collect your urine) making it difficult to urinate (pee). This might mean more surgery.  
For men, an APR may cause erection problems, trouble having an orgasm, or less intense orgasms. An APR can also damage the nerves that control ejaculation, leading to “dry” orgasms (orgasms without semen).
APR usually does not cause a loss of sexual function for women, but abdominal adhesions (scar tissue) may sometimes cause pain during sex.
More information on dealing with the sexual impact of cancer and its treatment can be found at Sex and the Adult Male With Cancer and Sex and the Adult Female With Cancer.Radiation therapy uses high-energy x-rays or particles to kill cancer cells. Depending on the stage of the anal cancer and other factors, radiation therapy might be used:

Along with chemotherapy as part of the main treatment for most anal cancers (This is called chemoradiation.)
After surgery if the doctor is concerned that all of the cancer might not have been removed. This might be seen in cancers of the perianal area. 
After surgery for some cancers of the perianal area (anal margin) that are at a high risk of coming back  
To help treat cancer that has come back in the groin lymph nodes after initial treatment
To help control cancer that has spread, such as to the lungs or to relieve symptoms it causes such as pain or bleeding

Types of radiation therapy used for anal cancer
Different types of radiation therapy can be used to treat anal cancer. There are 2 main types:

External beam radiation therapy
Brachytherapy (internal radiation therapy)

External-beam radiation therapy
External-beam radiation therapy (EBRT) focuses radiation from outside the body onto the cancer. This is the type of radiation therapy most often used to treat anal cancer or its spread to other organs.
Treatment is much like getting an x-ray, but the radiation dose is stronger. The procedure itself is painless and each treatment lasts only a few minutes. Most often, radiation treatments to the anal area are given 5 days a week for 5 to 7 weeks, but this can vary based on the type of EBRT and the reason it’s being given.
Newer techniques allow doctors to give higher doses of radiation to the cancer while reducing the radiation to nearby healthy tissues:
Three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy (3D-CRT) uses special computers to precisely map the location of the cancer. Radiation beams are then shaped and aimed at the tumor from several directions. This makes them less likely to damage normal tissues. You will most likely be fitted with a plastic mold like a body cast to keep you in the exact same position each time so that the radiation can be aimed more accurately.
Intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is a form of 3D therapy and the preferred type of EBRT for anal cancer. It uses a computer-driven machine that rotates around you as it delivers radiation. Along with shaping the beams and aiming them from several angles, the intensity (strength) of the beams can be adjusted. This helps limit the dose reaching normal tissues and can reduce some side effects. IMRT lets doctors deliver a higher dose of radiation to the cancer compared to standard techniques.
Stereotactic body radiation therapy (SBRT) is a type of radiation that might be used if the anal cancer has come back in the same place or in the nearby lymph nodes. It might also be considered for tumors that have limited spread to other parts of the body, such as the brain.
Instead of giving a small dose of radiation each day for several weeks, SBRT uses very focused beams of high-dose radiation given in fewer (usually 1 to 5) treatments. Several beams are aimed at the tumor from different angles. For each treatment, you will lie in a specially designed body frame that keeps you still and in exactly the right place during treatment.
Side effects of external radiation therapy
Side effects vary based on the part of the body treated and the dose of radiation given. Some common short-term side effects include:

Diarrhea
Skin changes (like a sunburn) in areas being treated
Anal irritation and pain (called radiation proctitis)
Discomfort during bowel movements
Tiredness
Nausea
Low blood cell counts

In women, radiation may irritate the vagina. This can lead to discomfort and discharge.
Most of these side effects get better over time after radiation stops.
Long-term side effects can also occur:

Damage to anal tissue by radiation may cause scar tissue to form. This can sometimes keep the anal sphincter muscle from working as it should, which could lead to problems with bowel movements.
Radiation to the pelvis can weaken the bones, increasing the risk of fractures of the pelvis or hip.
Radiation can damage blood vessels that nourish the lining of the rectum and lead to chronic radiation proctitis (inflammation of the lining of the rectum). This can cause rectal bleeding and pain.
Radiation can affect fertility (the ability to have children) . People with anal cancer should discuss options for sperm banking or egg freezing with their doctor. (For more on this, see Male Fertility and Cancer and Female Fertility and Cancer.)
Radiation can lead to vaginal dryness and even a narrowing or shortening of the vagina (called vaginal stenosis), which can make sex painful. A woman can help prevent this problem by stretching the walls of her vagina several times a week. This can be done using a vaginal dilator (a plastic or rubber tube used to stretch out the vagina). (To learn more, see Sex and the Adult Female With Cancer.)
Radiation can lower sexual function in men and impotence is often reported.  
If radiation is given to the lymph nodes in the groin, it can lead to swelling problems in the genitals and legs, called lymphedema.

Brachytherapy (internal radiation)
Brachytherapy is not commonly used to treat anal cancer. When it is used, it's usually given as a radiation boost along with external radiation when a tumor isn't responding to regular chemoradiation (chemo plus external radiation).
Brachytherapy involves putting small sources of radioactive materials in or near the tumor. It focuses the radiation in the area of the cancer to minimize radiation damage to normal nearby tissue. Interstitial radiation or intracavitary radiation are different types of brachytherapy.
The possible side effects are a lot like those seen with external beam radiation therapy.Chemotherapy (chemo) is treatment with anti-cancer drugs that can be swallowed in pill form or injected into a vein. The drugs travel through the bloodstream to reach most parts of the body.
When is chemotherapy used?
Most people with anal cancer will need chemo, but chemo may be recommended in different situations:

Before surgery (neoadjuvant chemotherapy): Neoadjuvant chemo combined with radiation therapy (known as chemoradiation) is often the first treatment for most anal cancers. This can often cure the cancer without the need for surgery.
After surgery (adjuvant chemotherapy): Adjuvant chemotherapy might be given along with radiation (chemoradiation) after surgery to try to kill any cancer cells that may have been left behind. It's done to lower the chance of the cancer coming back.
If the cancer comes back in the groin lymph nodes (recurrence): Chemotherapy might be given alone or sometimes with radiation (if radiation was not given before)
For metastatic anal cancer: If anal cancer has spread to distant parts of the body, such as the liver or lungs, chemo can help keep the cancer under control or relieve symptoms it's causing.

Chemotherapy drugs used to treat anal cancer
In most cases, 2 or more drugs are used at the same time to shrink the cancer.

The main drug combination used to treat anal cancer is 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and mitomycin.
The combination of 5-FU and cisplatin can also be used, especially in people who can't get mitomycin or for advanced anal cancer.
In certain people who may be older or can’t tolerate 2 chemotherapy drugs, 5-FU alone may be given with radiation. 

In these treatments, the 5-FU is given into a vein 24 hours a day for 4 or 5 days. It's put in a small pump that you can take home with you. The other drugs are given more quickly on certain other days in the treatment cycle. Sometimes, the oral drug capecitabine might be given in place of 5-FU. Radiation is given 5 days a week for at least 5 weeks. Talk to your treatment team about your treatment plan and how and where you will get chemo.
For advanced anal cancer or anal cancer that has already been treated with 5-FU and mitomycin, other options for chemotherapy include:

Carboplatin with paclitaxel (Taxol)
5-FU with cisplatin
Oxaliplatin, Leucovorin and 5-FU
Docetaxel (Taxotere), cisplatin and 5-FU
Cisplatin, Leucovorin and 5-FU

Possible side effects of chemo for anal cancer
Chemo drugs can cause side effects. These depend on the type and dose of drugs given and how long they are taken. Some common side effects include:

Nausea and vomiting
Loss of appetite or weight changes
Hair loss
Diarrhea
Mouth sores

Chemo can also damage the blood-producing cells of the bone marrow, which can result in:

A greater chance of infection (from low white blood cell counts)
Easy bleeding or bruising (from low blood platelet counts)
Fatigue or shortness of breath (from low red blood cell counts)

Along with the risks above, some chemo drugs can cause other, less common side effects.
For instance, cisplatin, paclitaxel, oxaliplatin, or docetaxel might cause nerve damage (called peripheral neuropathy). This can lead to numbness, tingling, sensitivity to cold, or pain in the hands and feet.
Most side effects get better over time once treatment stops, but some can last a long time or even be permanent. If you're going to get chemo, be sure to discuss the drugs that will be used and their possible side effects.
Tell your doctor or nurse about any side effects as soon as you notice them so they can be treated promptly. For example, drugs can be used to help control nausea and vomiting. In some cases, changing the treatment dosage or delaying or stopping treatment may keep the side effects from getting worse.Immunotherapy is the use of medicines to stimulate a person’s own immune system to recognize and destroy cancer cells more effectively.  
Immune checkpoint inhibitors
An important part of the immune system is its ability to keep itself from attacking normal cells in the body. To do this, it uses “checkpoints” – proteins on immune cells that need to be turned on (or off) to start an immune response. Cancer cells sometimes use these checkpoints to avoid being attacked by the immune system. But drugs that target these checkpoints can be used to treat some people with anal cancer.
Nivolumab (Opdivo) and pembrolizumab (Keytruda) target PD-1, a protein on certain immune cells (called T cells) that normally helps keep these cells from attacking other cells in the body. By blocking PD-1, these drugs boost the immune response against cancer cells. This can shrink some tumors or slow their growth.
Nivolumab and pembrolizumab can be used in people with anal cancer that has spread (metastasized) and whose cancer starts growing after getting at least one type of chemotherapy. 
Nivolumab can be given as an intravenous (IV) infusion every 2 or 4 weeks. Pembrolizumab can be given as an intravenous (IV) infusion every 3 or 6 weeks.
Possible side effects of checkpoint inhibitors
Side effects of these drugs can include fatigue, cough, nausea, itching, skin rash, loss of appetite, constipation, joint pain, and diarrhea.
Other, more serious side effects occur less often.
Infusion reactions: Some people might have an infusion reaction while getting these drugs. This is like an allergic reaction, and can include fever, chills, flushing of the face, rash, itchy skin, feeling dizzy, wheezing, and trouble breathing. It’s important to tell your doctor or nurse right away if you have any of these symptoms while getting these drugs.
Autoimmune reactions: These drugs work by basically removing one of the defenses on the body’s immune system. Sometimes the immune system starts attacking other parts of the body, which can cause serious or even life-threatening problems in the lungs, intestines, liver, hormone-making glands, kidneys, or other organs.
It’s very important to report any new side effects to your health care team as soon as possible. If serious side effects do occur, treatment may need to be stopped and you may get high doses of corticosteroids to suppress your immune system.The type of treatment your cancer care team will recommend depends on the type of anal cancer, where it is, and how far it has spread (the stage).
Perianal tumors (previously called anal margin cancers) are sometimes treated differently from anal canal cancers.
Stages I and II
These cancers have grown into the anal wall but have not grown into nearby organs. Most often they have not spread to nearby lymph nodes.
Surgery (local resection) might be used to remove some small tumors (usually less than 2 centimeter or 1 inch) that do not involve the sphincter muscle. In some cases, this may be followed with chemo and radiation therapy.
The standard treatment for anal cancers that cannot be removed without harming the anal sphincter is external beam radiation therapy (EBRT) combined with chemo (called chemoradiation). In chemoradiation, the 2 treatments are given over the same time period. The chemo is usually 5-FU with mitomycin. This combination of chemo is typically given during the first week and around the fifth week of treatment. The EBRT is given daily, Monday through Friday, for 5 to 7 weeks. 
If the cancer hasn’t gone away completely after chemoradiation is done, more treatment might be needed. But it's important to know that it may take months to see the full effects of chemoradiation. Because of this, it is important to continue follow-up appointments with your doctors to monitor the cancer through digital rectal examination and anoscopy.  Your doctors may watch any remaining cancer for up to 6 months. It may continue to shrink and even go away without more treatment.
At 6 months, if cancer is still found, more treatment is often needed. Most of the time, a surgery called an abdominoperineal resection (APR) might be recommended. In certain cases, only a local resection might be needed.
Stages IIIA, IIIB, and IIIC
These cancers have grown into nearby organs or spread to nearby lymph nodes, but they have not spread to distant parts of the body.
In most cases, the first treatment will be radiation therapy combined with chemo (chemoradiation). In chemoradiation, both treatments are given over the same time period. The chemo is usually 5-FU with mitomycin. This combination of chemo is typically given during the first week and then around the fifth week of treatment. The radiation is given daily, Monday through Friday, for 5 to 7 weeks. 
If some cancer remains after the chemoradiation, it may be watched closely for up to 6 months because it can take months to see the full effects of treatment.
If more treatment is needed because all of the cancer has not gone away by 6 months, most often a surgery called an abdominoperineal resection (APR) might be recommended. If the cancer has spread to or is still present in nearby lymph nodes, they may be removed with surgery or treated with radiation therapy.
Stage IV
In this stage, the cancer has spread to distant organs. Most often, anal cancer first spreads to the liver, but it can also spread to places such as the lungs, bones, and far away lymph nodes.
Treatment is very unlikely to cure these cancers. Instead, treatment is aimed at controlling the disease for as long as possible and relieving symptoms as much as possible. Chemotherapy, sometimes along with radiation, is usually the standard treatment.
Radiation might be used alone for cancer that has spread to the bones, brain or spinal cord. It might also be used for cancer that has spread to far away lymph nodes.
For some advanced anal cancers that have grown on chemotherapy, immunotherapy might be an option.
Because these cancers can be hard to treat, you might also want to think about taking part in a clinical trial of newer treatments.
Recurrent anal cancer
Cancer is called recurrent when it comes back after treatment. Recurrence can be local (in or near the same place it started) or distant (spread to organs like the lungs or liver).
If cancer returns in the anus or nearby lymph nodes after treatment, treatment depends on what treatment you had the first time. For example, if you had surgery alone, you may get radiation therapy and chemo (chemoradiation). If you first had chemoradiation, then you might be treated with surgery and/or chemo. Treating recurrent anal cancer often requires a surgery called an abdominoperineal resection (APR).
For some people, the cancer will come back in distant sites or organs in the body. The most common sites are the liver and lungs. The main treatment for this is usually chemo. Chemo might not cure the cancer, but it can often help control it and reduce any symptoms it's causing. In other cases, surgery or radiation therapy might be options to help treat these cancers. But as with chemo, they are unlikely to cure these cancers, so be sure you understand the goal of any treatments offered.
Clinical trials of newer treatments might also be useful for people with recurrent anal cancer.
Treating HIV-infected patients
Most people with HIV infection can be given the same treatment as others with anal cancer, and they can have a good outcome. People with advanced HIV disease and weakened immune systems might need to have less intensive chemotherapy.
Anal melanoma
Melanoma doesn’t respond well to chemotherapy or radiation, so surgery to remove the cancer is the main treatment when possible. Early stage anal melanomas are treated with surgery to remove the tumor and a rim of surrounding normal tissue (local excision). If the tumor is large or has grown into deeper tissues (such as the sphincter muscle) a bigger operation, such as an abdominoperineal resection (APR) might be needed.
If the melanoma has spread to other organs, it's treated like skin melanoma that has spread, often with immunotherapy or targeted therapy drugs. For more information about the treatment of advanced melanoma, see Treating Melanoma Skin Cancer.For many people with anal cancer, treatment can remove or destroy the cancer. Completing treatment can be both stressful and exciting. You may be relieved to finish treatment, but it’s hard not to worry about cancer coming back. This is very common if you’ve had cancer.
For other people, anal cancer may never go away completely. Some people may need to get treatments to try to control the cancer for as long as possible. Learning to live with cancer that doesn't go away can be difficult and very stressful. 
Follow-up care
When you have completed treatment, your doctors will still want to watch you closely. It's very important to go to all of your follow-up appointments. During these visits, your doctors will ask if you are having any problems and may do a physical exam, which will include a rectal exam, an exam of the anus, and an exam to see if any nearby lymph nodes are enlarged. Blood tests and imaging tests such as CT scans may also be ordered. These exams and tests are meant to look for signs of the cancer returning or side effects from treatment. 
Almost any cancer treatment can have side effects. Some might only last for a few days or weeks to months, but others might last a long time. Some side effects might not even show up until years after you have finished treatment. Your doctor visits are a good time to ask questions and to talk about any changes or problems you notice or concerns you have.
Doctor visits and tests
For people with no signs of anal cancer, many doctors recommend follow-up visits (which may include an anoscopy) with physical exams every 3 to 6 months for at least the first 3 years after treatment. CT scans or MRIs are also often done regularly for a certain period of time. These visits may be less often (about every 6 months) for the next several years. Some doctors may advise different follow-up schedules.
Close follow-up is very important in the first several months after chemoradiation treatment, especially if not all of the cancer is gone. Some tumors continue to shrink after chemoradiation, so the doctor will want to watch the cancer closely during this time to see if more treatment might still be needed.
If you have a colostomy
Most people treated for anal cancer don’t need extensive surgery (known as an abdominoperineal resection, or APR). But if you do have an APR, you will need to have a permanent colostomy.
If you have a colostomy, follow-up is important. You might feel worried or isolated from normal activities. A wound, ostomy, continence nurse (WOCN) or enterostomal therapist (a health care professional trained to help people with their colostomies) can teach you how to care for your colostomy. You can also ask the American Cancer Society about programs offering information and support in your area. See our colostomy information to learn more.
Ask your doctor for a survivorship care plan
Talk with your doctor about developing a survivorship care plan for you. This plan might include: 

A suggested schedule for follow-up exams and tests
A schedule for other tests you might need in the future, such as early detection (screening) tests for other types of cancer, or tests to look for long-term health effects from your cancer
A list of possible late- or long-term side effects from your treatment, including what to watch for and when you should contact your doctor
Suggestions for things you can do that might improve your health, including possibly lowering your chances of the cancer coming back
Reminders to keep your appointments with your primary care provider (PCP), who will monitor your general health care 

Keeping health insurance and copies of your medical records
Even after treatment, it’s very important to keep health insurance. Tests and doctor visits cost a lot, and even though no one wants to think of their cancer coming back, this could happen.
At some point after your cancer treatment, you might find yourself seeing a new doctor who doesn’t know about your medical history. It’s important to keep copies of your medical records to give your new doctor the details of your diagnosis and treatment.
Can I lower my risk of the anal cancer progressing or coming back?
If you have (or have had) anal cancer, you probably want to know if there are things you can do that might lower your risk of the cancer growing or coming back, such as exercising, eating a certain type of diet, or taking nutritional supplements. Unfortunately, it’s not yet clear if there are things you can do that will help.
Adopting healthy behaviors such as not smoking, eating well, getting regular physical activity, and staying at a healthy weight might help, but no one knows for sure. However, we do know that these types of changes can have positive effects on your health that can extend beyond your risk of anal cancer or other cancers. Stopping smoking may also help you tolerate treatments like chemotherapy and radiation much better. 
About dietary supplements
So far, no dietary supplements (including vitamins, minerals, and herbal products) have been shown to clearly help lower the risk of anal cancer progressing or coming back. This doesn’t mean that no supplements will help, but it’s important to know that none have been proven to do so.
Dietary supplements are not regulated like medicines in the United States – they do not have to be proven effective (or even safe) before being sold, although there are limits on what they’re allowed to claim they can do. If you’re thinking about taking any type of nutritional supplement, talk to your health care team. They can help you decide which ones you can use safely while avoiding those that might be harmful.
If the cancer comes back
If the cancer does recur at some point, your treatment options will depend on where the cancer is located, what treatments you’ve had before, and your health. For more information on how recurrent cancer is treated, see ﻿Treatment of Anal Cancer, by Stage.
For more general information on recurrence, you may also want to see Understanding Recurrence.
Getting emotional support
It's normal to feel depressed, anxious, or worried when anal cancer is a part of your life. Some people are affected more than others. But everyone can benefit from help and support from other people, whether friends and family, religious groups, support groups, professional counselors, or others. Learn more in Life After Cancer.
Second Cancers After Anal Cancer
Cancer survivors can be affected by a number of health problems, but often a major concern is facing cancer again. Cancer that comes back after treatment is called a recurrence. But some cancer survivors develop a new, unrelated cancer later. This is called a second cancer.
Unfortunately, being treated for anal cancer does not mean you cannot get another cancer. People who have had anal cancer can still get the same types of cancers that other people get. In fact, they might be at a higher risk for certain types of cancers.
Survivors of anal cancer can get any type of second cancer, but they have an increased risk of:

Cancer of the tongue
Cancer of the tonsil
Cervical cancer
Vaginal cancer
Vulvar cancer
Lung cancer
Kaposi sarcoma

People diagnosed with anal cancer before age 50 also have an increased risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
Anal cancer is linked to infection with human papilloma virus (HPV), and many of these cancers (cancers of the tongue, tonsil, cervix, vulva, and vagina) are also linked to HPV infection.
Follow-up after anal cancer treatment
After completing treatment for anal cancer, you should see your doctor regularly to look for any new symptoms or problems, because they could be caused by the cancer coming back or by a new disease or second cancer.
Survivors of anal cancer should follow the American Cancer Society guidelines for the early detection of cancer, such as those for colorectal, breast, cervical, and prostate cancer. Screening tests can find some cancers early, when they are likely to be easier to treat. For people who have had anal cancer, most experts don’t recommend any additional testing to look for second cancers unless you have symptoms.
Can I lower my risk of getting a second cancer?
Survivors of anal cancer should also stay away from tobacco products. Smoking increases the risk of many cancers and might further increase the risk of many of the second cancers seen after anal cancer.
To help maintain good health, anal cancer survivors should also:

Get to and stay at a healthy weight
Keep physically active and limit the time you spend sitting or lying down
Follow a healthy eating pattern that includes plenty of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains, and limits or avoids red and processed meats, sugary drinks, and highly processed foods
Don't drink alcohol. If you drink, have no more than 1 drink per day for women or 2 per day for men

These steps may also lower the risk of some other cancers.
See Second Cancers for more information about causes of second cancers.What is anal cancer?
Cancer that starts in the anus is called anal cancer. It starts when cells in the anus grow out of control and crowd out normal cells.
Cancer cells can spread to other parts of the body. Cancer cells in the anus can sometimes travel to the liver and grow there. When cancer cells do this, it’s called metastasis. To doctors, the cancer cells in the new place look just like the ones from the anus.
Cancer is always named for the place where it starts. So when anus cancer spreads to the liver (or any other place), it’s still called anal cancer. It’s not called liver cancer unless it starts from cells in the liver.