Basal and squamous cell skin cancers are the most common types of skin cancer. These cancers are often related to sun exposure.Cancers of the skin (most of which are basal and squamous cell skin cancers) are by far the most common of all types of cancer in the United States. According to one estimate, about 5.4 million basal and squamous cell skin cancers are diagnosed each year in the US (occurring in about 3.3 million people, as some people have more than one). About 8 out of 10 of these are basal cell cancers. Squamous cell cancers occur less often.
The number of these cancers has been increasing for many years. This is probably from a combination of better skin cancer detection, people getting more sun exposure, and people living longer.
Although basal and squamous cell skin cancers are common, deaths from these cancers are not. For the US, estimates have ranged from about 2,000 to about 8,000 people each year (mostly from squamous cell skin cancer).
Most people who die from these cancers are older and may not have seen a doctor until the cancer has already grown quite large. Other people more likely to die of these cancers include those whose immune system is suppressed, such as people who have had organ transplants or are being treated for autoimmune diseases such as lupus or rheumatoid arthritis.
The exact number of people in the US who develop or die from basal and squamous cell skin cancers each year isn't known for sure. Unlike most other types of cancer, basal and squamous cell skin cancers are not reported to and tracked by cancer registries.Research into the causes, prevention, detection, and treatment of basal and squamous cell skin cancer is going on in many medical centers throughout the world.It’s important to know about the risk factors for skin cancer because there may be things you can do that could lower your risk of getting it. If you are at higher risk because of certain factors, there are also things you can do that might help find it early, when it’s likely to be easier to treat.There are many known risk factors for basal and squamous cell skin cancers, but it’s not always clear exactly how these factors might cause cancer.
Most basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers are caused by repeated and unprotected skin exposure to ultraviolet (UV) rays from sunlight, as well as from man-made sources such as tanning beds. UV rays can damage the DNA inside skin cells and cause changes in genes.There is no sure way to prevent all basal and squamous cell skin cancers. Some risk factors such as your age, sex, race, and family history can’t be controlled. But there are things you can do that could lower your risk of getting these and other skin cancers.With skin self-exams and skin checks by a health care professional, basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers can often be found early. When skin cancers are found early, they are likely to be easier to treat.Basal and squamous cell skin cancers often don't cause bothersome symptoms until they have grown quite large. Then they may itch, bleed, or even hurt. But often they can be seen or felt long before they reach this point.Most basal and squamous cell skin cancers are brought to a doctor’s attention because of signs or symptoms a person is having.The stage of a basal or squamous cell skin cancer is a way of describing how large the cancer is and how far it has spread. Knowing the stage is important to help determine your treatment options and to get an idea of how likely the cancer is to come back after treatment.If you have basal or squamous cell skin cancer, it’s important to have honest, open discussions with your doctor. Ask any question, no matter how small it might seem. Here are some questions you might want to ask.Surgery is a common treatment for both basal cell cancers (BCCs) and squamous cell cancers (SCCs) of the skin. Different surgical techniques can be used. The options depend on the type of skin cancer, how large the cancer is, where it is on the body, and other factors. Most often the surgery can be done in a doctor’s office or hospital clinic using a local anesthetic (numbing medicine).
For skin cancers with a high risk of spreading, surgery sometimes will be followed by other treatments, such as radiation or chemotherapy.Cryotherapy, photodynamic therapy, topical chemotherapy, or other local treatments might be options to treat basal and squamous cell skin cancers (or pre-cancers) that haven't spread beyond the skin.
These are called local treatments because they only affect the area being treated. Some of these techniques might be described as types of surgery because they destroy a targeted area of body tissue. But these techniques are different from surgery because they don’t use scalpels or cut into the skin. (Radiation therapy is also a type of local treatment.)Radiation therapy uses high-energy rays (such as x-rays) or particles (such as electrons) to kill cancer cells.Systemic chemotherapy (chemo) uses anti-cancer drugs that are given through an IV into a vein or taken by mouth. These drugs travel through the bloodstream to all parts of the body. Unlike topical chemotherapy, which is applied to the skin, systemic chemotherapy can attack cancer cells that have spread to lymph nodes and other organs.As researchers have learned more about some of the changes inside skin cancer cells that help them grow, they have developed newer types of drugs that target these changes. These drugs target parts of skin cancer cells that make them different from normal skin cells.Immunotherapy is the use of medicines to stimulate a person’s own immune system to recognize and destroy cancer cells more effectively. Some types of immunotherapy can be used to treat people with advanced basal cell carcinoma (BCC) or squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the skin.Several types of treatment can be used to remove or destroy basal cell skin cancers (BCCs). The options depend on factors such as the tumor size and location, and a person’s age, general health, and preferences. These cancers very rarely spread to other parts of the body, although they can still grow into nearby tissues and cause serious problems if not treated.Treatment options for squamous cell cancer (SCC) of the skin depend on the risk of the cancer coming back, which is based on factors like the size and location of the tumor and how the cancer cells look under a microscope, as well as if a person has a weakened immune system.Actinic keratosis (AK) is usually considered to be a pre-cancer, while Bowen disease is a very early form of squamous cell skin cancer. These conditions are often treated so that they don’t have a chance to grow into something more serious.For most people with basal or squamous cell skin cancers, treatment will remove or destroy the cancer. Completing treatment can be both stressful and exciting. You may be relieved to finish treatment, but you might find it hard not to worry about cancer coming back. (When cancer comes back after treatment, it is called recurrent cancer or a recurrence.) This is very common if you’ve had cancer.
For a small number of people with more advanced skin cancers, the cancer may never go away completely. These people may get regular treatments to help keep the cancer in check for as long as possible. Learning to live with cancer that does not go away can be difficult and very stressful.What are basal and squamous cell skin cancers?
Basal cell skin cancer and squamous cell skin cancer are the two most common types of skin cancer.
The skin is the largest organ in the body. It helps keep the body warm, protects the rest of the body from the sun, covers organs inside the body, guards against germs, and helps make vitamin D.
Your skin is made up of several different layers and many different types of cells. Skin cancer starts when some of these cells begin to grow out of control.