Bladder cancer starts when cells in the urinary bladder start to grow out of control. As more cancer cells develop, they can form a tumor and, with time, might spread to other parts of the body.Bladder cancer makes up about 4% of cancers in the US. It is the fourth most common cancer in men, but it's less common in women.Research on bladder cancer is being done in many university hospitals, medical centers, and other institutions around the world. Each year, scientists find out more about what causes bladder cancer, how to find it as soon as possible, and how to better treat it.Many risk factors make a person more likely to develop bladder cancer.Researchers don’t know exactly what causes most bladder cancers. But they have found some risk factors (see Bladder Cancer Risk Factors ) and are starting to understand how some of them might cause cells in the bladder to become cancer.There is no sure way to prevent bladder cancer. Some risk factors, like your age and family history, can’t be controlled. But there might be things you can do that could help lower your risk.Bladder cancer can sometimes be found early, when it's small and hasn't spread beyond the bladder. Finding it early improves your chances that treatment will work.Bladder cancer can often be found early because it can cause signs or symptoms that lead a person to see a health care provider.Bladder cancer is often found because of signs or symptoms a person is having. Sometimes it might be found because of the results of a lab test a person gets for another reason.
If bladder cancer is suspected, exams and tests will be needed to confirm the diagnosis. If cancer is found, more tests will be done to help find out the extent (stage) of the cancer.After a person is diagnosed with bladder cancer, doctors will try to figure out if it has spread, and if so, how far. This process is called staging. The stage of a cancer describes the extent (amount) of cancer in the body.Survival rates can give you an idea of what percentage of people with the same type and stage of cancer are still alive a certain amount of time (usually 5 years) after they were diagnosed. They can’t tell you how long you will live, but they may help give you a better understanding of how likely it is that your treatment will be successful.It’s important to have honest, open talks with your cancer care team. Ask any question, no matter how small it might seem. Here are some examples of things you might want to ask:Surgery is part of the treatment for most bladder cancers. Different types of surgery might be done, depending on the stage (extent) of the cancer, as well as a person’s overall health and preferences.With intravesical therapy, the doctor puts a liquid drug right into your bladder rather than giving it by mouth or putting it into your blood. The drug is given through a tube (urinary catheter) that's been put into your bladder through your urethra.Chemotherapy (chemo) is the use of drugs to treat cancer.Radiation therapy uses high-energy radiation to kill cancer cells.Immunotherapy is the use of medicines to help a person’s own immune system recognize and destroy cancer cells. This type of treatment is sometimes used to treat bladder cancer.As researchers have learned more about the changes inside cells that cause them to become cancer cells, they have developed newer drugs that target some of these changes. These targeted drugs work differently from other types of treatment, such as chemotherapy (chemo). They may work in some cases when other treatments don't. Targeted drugs also often have different types of side effects.The treatment of bladder cancer is based mainly on the clinical stage of the cancer when it’s first diagnosed. This is your doctor’s best estimate of how far the cancer has grown, based on the exams and tests done so far. The stage takes into account how deeply the cancer is thought to have grown into the bladder wall and if it has spread beyond the bladder.
Other factors, such as the size of the tumor, how fast the cancer cells are growing (the grade of the cancer), and how many tumors there are, are also important, especially for non-muscle invasive bladder cancers (NMIBCs), which are earlier-stage cancers that haven’t yet invaded the muscle layer of the bladder wall. These factors can be used to determine the risk group of the cancer, which, in turn, can affect treatment options.
Still other factors, such as your overall health and preferences, can also affect your treatment options.For some people with bladder cancer, treatment can remove or destroy the cancer. The end of treatment can be both stressful and exciting. You may be relieved to finish treatment, but you might find it hard not to worry about cancer coming back. This is very common if you’ve had cancer.
For some people, bladder cancer might never go away completely, or it might come back, either in the bladder or in another part of the body. Some people might need regular treatments to try to keep the cancer in check. Learning to live with cancer that doesn't go away can be difficult and very stressful.What is bladder cancer?
Cancer can start any place in the body. Cancer that starts in the bladder is called bladder cancer. It starts when cells in the bladder grow out of control and crowd out normal cells. This makes it hard for the body to work the way it should.
Bladder cancer cells can sometimes spread to other parts of the body, such as the bones, and grow there. This spread is called metastasis. Even if bladder cancer spreads to the bones (or any other place), the cancer cells there are still bladder cancer cells.
The bladder
The bladder is a hollow organ that stores urine before it leaves your body. It sits in the lowest part of your belly, called your pelvis. Urine is made in your kidneys. Tubes called ureters connect your kidneys to the bladder. Urine flows through the ureters and into your bladder, where it's stored. When you urinate (pee), the bladder squeezes the urine out through a tube called the urethra.
Bladder cancer usually starts in the inner layer of the bladder wall. As the cancer grows through the layers of the bladder wall, it becomes harder to treat.
The "transitional epithelium" in the picture below is the lining layer where most bladder cancers start. Over time they can spread deeper into the other layers.