Breast cancer is a type of cancer that starts in the breast. It can start in one or both breasts.
Cancer starts when cells begin to grow out of control. (To learn more about how cancers start and spread, see What Is Cancer?)
Breast cancer occurs almost entirely in women, but men can get breast cancer, too.
It’s important to understand that most breast lumps are benign and not cancer (malignant). Non-cancer breast tumors are abnormal growths, but they do not spread outside of the breast. They are not life threatening, but some types of benign breast lumps can increase a woman's risk of getting breast cancer. Any breast lump or change needs to be checked by a health care professional to find out if it is benign or malignant (cancer) and if it might affect your future cancer risk. See Non-cancerous Breast Conditions to learn more.
Where breast cancer starts
Breast cancers can start from different parts of the breast. The breast is an organ that sits on top of the upper ribs and chest muscles. There is a left and right breast and each one has mainly glands, ducts, and fatty tissue. In women, the breast makes and delivers milk to feed newborns and infants. The amount of fatty tissue in the breast determines the size of each breast.
The breast has different parts:

Lobules are the glands that make breast milk. Cancers that start here are called lobular cancers.
Ducts are small canals that come out from the lobules and carry the milk to the nipple. This is the most common place for breast cancer to start. Cancers that start here are called ductal cancers.
The nipple is the opening in the skin of the breast where the ducts come together and turn into larger ducts so the milk can leave the breast. The nipple is surrounded by slightly darker thicker skin called the areola. A less common type of breast cancer called Paget disease of the breast can start in the nipple.
The fat and connective tissue (stroma) surround the ducts and lobules and help keep them in place. A less common type of breast cancer called phyllodes tumor can start in the stroma.
Blood vessels and lymph vessels are also found in each breast. Angiosarcoma is a less common type of breast cancer that can start in the lining of these vessels. The lymph system is described below.

A small number of cancers start in other tissues in the breast. These cancers are called sarcomas and lymphomas and are not really thought of as breast cancers.
To learn more, see Types of Breast Cancer.We don’t know what causes each case of breast cancer. But we do know many of the risk factors for these cancers (see Lifestyle-related Breast Cancer Risk Factors and Breast Cancer Risk Factors You Cannot Change). For example, lifestyle-related risk factors, such as what you eat and how much you exercise, can increase your chance of developing breast cancer, but it’s not yet known exactly how some of these risk factors cause normal cells to become cancer. Hormones also seem to play a role in many cases of breast cancer, but just how this happens is not fully understood.
We do know that normal breast cells can become cancer because of changes or mutations in genes. But only about 1 in 10 breast cancers (10%) are linked with known abnormal genes that are passed on from parents (inherited). Many genes have not yet been discovered, so women with a family history of breast cancer might have inherited an abnormal gene that doesn't show on a genetic test. Most breast cancers (about 90%) develop from acquired (not inherited) gene changes that have not yet been identified. 
How gene changes can lead to breast cancer
Genes control how our cells function. They are made up of a chemical called DNA, which comes from both our parents. DNA affects more than just how we look; it also can influence our risk for developing certain diseases, including some kinds of cancer.
Normal cells have genes called proto-oncogenes, which help control when the cells grow, divide to make new cells, or stay alive. If a proto-oncogene is mutated (changed) in a certain way, it becomes an oncogene. Cells that have these mutated oncogenes can become cancer.
Normal cells also have genes called tumor suppressor genes, which help control how often normal cells divide in two, repair DNA mistakes, or cause cells to die at the right time. If a cell has a mutated tumor suppressor gene, then the cell can turn into cancer.
Cancers can be caused by gene changes that turn on oncogenes or turn off tumor suppressor genes. Changes in many different genes are usually needed to cause breast cancer.
Inherited gene changes
Some gene changes (mutations) are inherited or passed to you from your parents. This means the mutations are in all your cells when you are born.
Certain inherited gene changes can greatly increase the risk for developing certain cancers and are linked to many of the cancers that run in some families. For instance, the BRCA genes (BRCA1 and BRCA2) are tumor suppressor genes. When one of these genes changes, it no longer suppresses abnormal cell growth, and cancer is more likely to develop. A change in one of these genes can be passed from a parent to a child.
Women have already begun to benefit from advances in understanding the genetic basis of breast cancer. Genetic testing can identify some women who have inherited mutations in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 tumor suppressor genes as well as other less common genes such as PALB2, ATM, or CHEK2. These women can then take steps to reduce their risk of breast cancer by increasing awareness of their breasts and following appropriate screening recommendations to help find cancer at an earlier, more treatable stage. Since these mutations are also often associated with other cancers (besides breast), women with these mutations might also consider early screening and preventive actions for other cancers.
Mutations in tumor suppressor genes like the BRCA genes are considered “high penetrance” because they often lead to cancer. Although many women with high penetrance mutations develop cancer, most cases of cancer (including breast cancer) are not caused by this kind of mutation.
More often, low-penetrance mutations or gene variations are a factor in cancer development. Each of these may have a small effect on cancer occurring in any one person, but the overall effect on the population can be large because the mutations are common, and people often have more than one at the same time. The genes involved can affect things like hormone levels, metabolism, or other factors that impact risk for breast cancer. These genes might also cause much of the risk of breast cancer that runs in families.
Acquired gene changes
Most gene mutations linked to breast cancer are acquired. This means the change takes place in breast cells during a person's life rather than having been inherited or born with them. Acquired DNA mutations take place over time and are only in the breast cancer cells.
These acquired mutations of oncogenes and/or tumor suppressor genes may result from other factors, like radiation or cancer-causing chemicals. But some gene changes may just be random events that sometimes happen inside a cell, without having an outside cause. So far, the causes of most acquired mutations that could lead to breast cancer are still unknown. Most breast cancers have several acquired gene mutations.There are many types of breast cancer, and many different ways to describe them. It’s easy to get confused.
A breast cancer's type is determined by the specific cells in the breast that become cancer.
Ductal or lobular carcinoma
Most breast cancers are carcinomas, which are tumors that start in the epithelial cells that line organs and tissues throughout the body. When carcinomas form in the breast, they are usually a more specific type called adenocarcinoma, which starts in cells in the ducts (the milk ducts) or the lobules (glands in the breast that make milk).
In situ vs. invasive breast cancers
The type of breast cancer can also refer to whether the cancer has spread or not. In situ breast cancer (ductal carcinoma in situ or DCIS) is a pre-cancer that starts in a milk duct and has not grown into the rest of the breast tissue. The term invasive (or infiltrating) breast cancer is used to describe any type of breast cancer that has spread (invaded) into the surrounding breast tissue.About 1 in 5 new breast cancers will be ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS). Nearly all women with this early stage of breast cancer can be cured.
DCIS is also called intraductal carcinoma or stage 0 breast cancer. DCIS is a non-invasive or pre-invasive breast cancer. This means the cells that line the ducts have changed to cancer cells but they have not spread through the walls of the ducts into the nearby breast tissue.Breast cancers that have spread into surrounding breast tissue are known as invasive breast cancers.
Most breast cancers are invasive, but there are different types of invasive breast cancer. The two most common are invasive ductal carcinoma and invasive lobular carcinoma.
Inflammatory breast cancer is also a type of invasive breast cancer. 
Invasive (infiltrating) ductal carcinoma (IDC)
This is the most common type of breast cancer. About 8 in 10 invasive breast cancers are invasive (or infiltrating) ductal carcinomas (IDC).
IDC starts in the cells that line a milk duct in the breast. From there, the cancer breaks through the wall of the duct, and grows into the nearby breast tissues. At this point, it may be able to spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body through the lymph system and bloodstream.
Invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC)
About 1 in 10 invasive breast cancers is an invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC).
ILC starts in the breast glands that make milk (lobules). Like IDC, it can spread (metastasize) to other parts of the body. Invasive lobular carcinoma may be harder to detect on physical exam and imaging, like mammograms, than invasive ductal carcinoma. And compared to other kinds of invasive carcinoma, it is more likely to affect both breasts. About 1 in 5 women with ILC might have cancer in both breasts at the time they are diagnosed. 
Less common types of invasive breast cancer
There are some special types of breast cancer that are sub-types of invasive carcinoma. They are less common than the breast cancers named above and each typically make up fewer than 5% of all breast cancers. These are often named after features of the cancer cells, like the ways the cells are arranged.
Some of these may have a better prognosis than the more common IDC. These include:

Adenoid cystic (or adenocystic) carcinoma
Low-grade adenosquamous carcinoma (this is a type of metaplastic carcinoma)
Medullary carcinoma
Mucinous (or colloid) carcinoma
Papillary carcinoma
Tubular carcinoma

Some sub-types have the same or maybe worse prognoses than IDC. These include:

Metaplastic carcinoma (most types, including spindle cell and squamous, except low grade adenosquamous carcinoma)
Micropapillary carcinoma
Mixed carcinoma (has features of both invasive ductal and invasive lobular)

In general, all of these sub-types are still treated like IDC.
Treating invasive breast cancer
Treatment of invasive breast cancer depends on how advanced the cancer is (the stage of the cancer) and other factors. Most women will have some type of surgery to remove the tumor. Depending on the type of breast cancer and how advanced it is, you might need other types of treatment as well, either before or after surgery, or sometimes both.
See Treating Breast Cancer for details on different types of treatment, as well as common treatment approaches based on the stage or other factors.Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) accounts for about 10-15% of all breast cancers. The term triple-negative breast cancer refers to the fact that the cancer cells don’t have estrogen or progesterone receptors (ER or PR) and also don’t make any or too much of the protein called HER2. (The cells test "negative" on all 3 tests.) These cancers tend to be more common in women younger than age 40, who are Black, or who have a BRCA1 mutation.
TNBC differs from other types of invasive breast cancer in that it tends to grow and spread faster, has fewer treatment options, and tends to have a worse prognosis (outlook).
Signs and symptoms of triple-negative breast cancer
Triple-negative breast cancer can have the same signs and symptoms as other common types of breast cancer.
How is triple-negative breast cancer diagnosed?
Once a breast cancer diagnosis has been made using imaging tests and a biopsy, the cancer cells will be checked for certain proteins. If the cells do not have estrogen or progesterone receptors (ER or PR), and also do not make any or too much of the HER2 protein, the cancer is considered to be triple-negative breast cancer.
Survival rates for triple-negative breast cancer
TNBC tends to grow quickly, is more likely to have spread at the time it’s found, and is more likely to come back after treatment than other types of breast cancer. Because of this, the survival rates for TNBC are generally not quite as high as they are for other types of breast cancer.
Survival rates can give you an idea of what percentage of people with the same type and stage of cancer are still alive a certain amount of time (usually 5 years) after they were diagnosed. They can’t tell you how long you will live, but they may help give you a better understanding of how likely it is that your treatment will be successful.
Keep in mind that survival rates are estimates and are often based on previous outcomes of large numbers of people who had a specific cancer, but they can’t predict what will happen in any particular person’s case. These statistics can be confusing and may lead you to have more questions. Talk with your doctor about how these numbers may apply to you, as they are familiar with your situation. 
What is a 5-year relative survival rate?
A relative survival rate compares women with the same type and stage of breast cancer to women in the overall population. For example, if the 5-year relative survival rate for a specific stage of breast cancer is 90%, it means that women who have that cancer are, on average, about 90% as likely as women who don’t have that cancer to live for at least 5 years after being diagnosed.
Where do these numbers come from?
The American Cancer Society relies on information from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program (SEER) database, maintained by the National Cancer Institute (NCI), to provide survival statistics for different types of cancer.
The SEER database tracks 5-year relative survival rates for breast cancer in the United States, based on how far the cancer has spread. The SEER database, however, does not group cancers by AJCC TNM stages (stage 1, stage 2, stage 3, etc.). Instead, it groups cancers into localized, regional, and distant stages:

Localized: There is no sign that the cancer has spread outside of the breast.
Regional: The cancer has spread outside the breast to nearby structures or lymph nodes.
Distant: The cancer has spread to distant parts of the body such as the lungs, liver, or bones.

5-year relative survival rates for triple-negative breast cancer
These numbers are based on women diagnosed with TNBC between 2012 and 2018.



SEER Stage
5-year Relative Survival Rate


Localized
91%


Regional
66%


Distant
12%


All stages combined
77%



Understanding the numbers

Women now being diagnosed with TNBC may have a better outlook than these numbers show. Treatments improve over time, and these numbers are based on women who were diagnosed and treated at least 5 years earlier.
These numbers apply only to the stage of the cancer when it is first diagnosed. They do not apply later on if the cancer grows, spreads, or comes back after treatment.
These numbers don’t take everything into account. Survival rates are grouped based on how far the cancer has spread, but your age and overall health, how well the cancer responds to treatment, tumor grade, and other factors can also affect your outlook.

Treating triple-negative breast cancer
Triple-negative breast cancer has fewer treatment options than other types of invasive breast cancer. This is because the cancer cells do not have the estrogen or progesterone receptors or enough of the HER2 protein to make hormone therapy or targeted HER2 drugs work. Because hormone therapy and anti-HER2 drugs are not choices for women with triple-negative breast cancer, chemotherapy is often used.
If the cancer has not spread to distant sites, surgery is an option. Chemotherapy might be given first to shrink a large tumor, followed by surgery. Chemotherapy is often recommended after surgery to reduce the chances of the cancer coming back. Radiation might also be an option depending on certain features of the tumor and the type of surgery you had.
In cases where the cancer has spread to other parts of the body (stage IV), platinum chemotherapy, targeted drugs like a PARP inhibitor or antibody-drug conjugate, or immunotherapy with chemotherapy might be considered.
For details, see Treatment of Triple-negative Breast Cancer.Angiosarcoma is a rare cancer that starts in the cells that line blood vessels or lymph vessels. Many times it's a complication of previous radiation treatment to the breast. It can happen 8-10 years after getting radiation treatment to the breast.
Signs and symptoms of angiosarcoma
Angiosarcoma can cause skin changes like purple colored nodules and/or a lump in the breast. It can also occur in the affected arms of women with lymphedema, but this is not common. (Lymphedema is swelling that can develop after surgery or radiation therapy to treat breast cancer.) 
How is angiosarcoma of the breast diagnosed?
One or more of the following imaging tests may be done to check for breast changes:

Diagnostic mammogram
Breast ultrasound
Breast MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) scan

Angiosarcoma is diagnosed by a biopsy, removing a small piece of the breast tissue and looking at it closely in the lab. Only a biopsy can tell for sure that it is cancer.
Treating angiosarcoma
Angiosarcomas tend to grow and spread quickly. Treatment usually includes surgery to remove the breast (mastectomy). The axillary lymph nodes are typically not removed. Radiation might be given in certain cases of angiosarcomas that are not related to prior breast radiation. For more information on sarcomas, see Soft Tissue Sarcoma.Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is rare and accounts for only 1% to 5% of all breast cancers. Although it is a type of invasive ductal carcinoma, its symptoms, outlook, and treatment are different. IBC causes symptoms of breast inflammation like swelling and redness, which is caused by cancer cells blocking lymph vessels in the skin causing the breast to look "inflamed."
Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) differs from other types of breast cancer in many ways:

IBC doesn't look like a typical breast cancer. It often does not cause a breast lump, and it might not show up on a mammogram. This makes it harder to diagnose.
IBC tends to occur in younger women (younger than 40 years of age).
Black women appear to develop IBC more often than White women.
IBC is more common among women who are overweight or obese.
IBC tends to be more aggressive—it grows and spreads much more quickly—than more common types of breast cancer.
IBC is always at least at a locally advanced stage when it’s first diagnosed because the breast cancer cells have grown into the skin. (This means it is at least stage III.)
In about 1 of 3 cases, IBC has already spread (metastasized) to distant parts of the body when it is diagnosed. This makes it harder to treat successfully.
Women with IBC tend to have a worse prognosis (outcome) than women with other common types of breast cancer.

Signs and symptoms of inflammatory breast cancer
Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) can cause a number of signs and symptoms, most of which develop quickly (within 3 to 6 months), including:

Swelling (edema) of the skin of the breast
Redness involving more than one-third of the breast
Pitting or thickening of the skin of the breast so that it may look and feel like an orange peel
A retracted or inverted nipple
One breast looking larger than the other because of swelling
One breast feeling warmer and heavier than the other
A breast that may be tender, painful, or itchy
Swelling of the lymph nodes under the arms or near the collarbonePaget disease of the breast is a rare type of breast cancer involving the skin of the nipple and the areola (the dark circle around the nipple). Paget disease usually affects only one breast. In 80-90% of cases, it’s usually found along with either ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) or infiltrating ductal carcinoma (invasive breast cancer).
Signs and symptoms of Paget disease of the breast
The skin of the nipple and areola often looks crusted, scaly, and red. There may be blood or yellow fluid coming out of the nipple. Sometimes the nipple looks flat or inverted. It also might burn or itch. Your doctor might try to treat this as eczema first, and if it does not improve, recommend a biopsy.
How is Paget disease of the breast diagnosed?
Most people with Paget disease of the breast also have tumors in the same breast. One or more of the following imaging tests may be done to check for other breast changes:

Diagnostic mammogram
Breast ultrasound
Breast MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) scan

Paget disease of the breast is diagnosed by a biopsy, removing a small piece of the breast tissue and looking at it closely in the lab. In some cases, the entire nipple may be removed. Only a biopsy can show for sure that it is cancer.
Treating Paget disease of the breast
Paget disease can be treated by removing the entire breast (mastectomy) or breast-conserving surgery (BCS) followed by whole-breast radiation therapy. If BCS is done, the entire nipple and areola area also needs to be removed. If invasive cancer is found, the lymph nodes under the arm will be checked for cancer.
If no lump is felt in the breast tissue, and your biopsy results show the cancer has not spread within the breast tissue, the outlook (prognosis) is excellent.
If the cancer has spread within the breast tissue (is invasive), the outlook is not as good, and the cancer will be staged and treated like any other invasive ductal carcinoma.How common is breast cancer?
Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women in the United States, except for skin cancers. It accounts for about 30% (or 1 in 3) of all new female cancers each year.
The American Cancer Society's estimates for breast cancer in the United States for 2024 are: 

About 310,720 new cases of invasive breast cancer will be diagnosed in women. 
About 56,500 new cases of ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) will be diagnosed.  
About 42,250 women will die from breast cancer.

Breast cancer mainly occurs in middle-aged and older women. The median age at the time of breast cancer diagnosis is 62. This means half of the women who developed breast cancer are 62 years of age or younger when they are diagnosed.  A very small number of women diagnosed with breast cancer are younger than 45.
Lifetime chance of getting breast cancer
Overall, the average risk of a woman in the United States developing breast cancer sometime in her life is about 13%. This means there is a 1 in 8 chance she will develop breast cancer. This also means there is a 7 in 8 chance she will never have the disease.
Trends in breast cancer incidence
In recent years, incidence rates have increased by 0.6% per year. The rise in incidence rates is a little steeper in women younger than 50 (1.0%).
Trends in breast cancer deaths
Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer death in women. (Only lung cancer kills more women each year.) The chance that a woman will die from breast cancer is about 1 in 40 (about 2.5%).
Breast cancer death rates have been decreasing steadily since 1989, for an overall decline of 42% through 2021. The decrease in death rates is believed to be the result of finding breast cancer earlier through screening and increased awareness, as well as better treatments. However, the decline has slowed slightly in recent years.
Differences by race and ethnicity
Some variations in breast cancer can be seen in racial and ethnic groups. For example:  

The median age at diagnosis is slightly younger for Black women (60 years old) compared to White women (64 years old).
Black women have the highest death rate from breast cancer. This is thought to be partially because Black women have have a higher risk of triple-negative breast cancer - more than any other racial or ethnic group.
At every age, Black women are more likely to die from breast cancer than any other race or ethnic group.
White, Asian, and Pacific Islander women are more likely to be diagnosed with localized breast cancer than Black, Hispanic, American Indian, and Alaska Native women.  
Asian and Pacific Islander women have the lowest death rate from breast cancer.

Breast cancer survivors
At this time there are more than 4 million breast cancer survivors in the United States. This includes women still being treated and those who have completed treatment.
Survival rates are discussed in Survival Rates for Breast Cancer.
Visit the American Cancer Society’s Cancer Statistics Center for more key statistics.Researchers around the world are working to find better ways to prevent, detect, and treat breast cancer, and to improve the quality of life of patients and survivors.
Research studies
Current guidance on preventing and treating breast cancer as well as what might cause it (among other things) has come mainly from information discovered from research studies. Research studies can range from studies done in the lab to clinical trials done with hundreds of thousands of people. Clinical trials are carefully controlled studies that can gather specific information about certain diseases as well as explore promising new treatments.
Clinical trials are one way to get the latest cancer treatments that are being investigated. Still, they are not right for everyone. If you would like to learn more about clinical trials that might be right for you, start by asking your doctor if your clinic or hospital conducts clinical trials, or see Clinical Trials to learn more.
Breast cancer causes
Studies continue to look at how certain lifestyle factors, habits, and other environmental factors, as well as inherited gene changes, might affect breast cancer risk. Here are a few examples:

Several studies are looking at the effects of physical activity, weight gain or loss, and diet on breast cancer risk.
Some breast cancers run in families, but many of the gene mutations (changes) that cause these breast cancers are not yet known. Research is being done to identify these gene changes.
Several studies are focusing on the best use of genetic testing for inherited breast cancer gene mutations.
Scientists are exploring how common gene variants (small changes in genes that are not as significant as mutations) may affect breast cancer risk. Gene variants typically have only a modest effect on risk by themselves, but when combined they could possibly have a large impact.
Possible environmental causes of breast cancer have also received more attention in recent years. While much of the science on this topic is still in its earliest stages, this is an area of active research.

Breast cancer prevention
Researchers are looking for ways to help reduce breast cancer risk, especially for women who are at high risk. Here are some examples:

Studies continue to look at whether certain levels of physical activity, losing weight, or eating certain foods, groups of foods, or types of diets might help lower breast cancer risk.
Some hormonal medicines such as tamoxifen, raloxifene, exemestane, and anastrozole have already been shown to help lower breast cancer risk for certain women at higher risk. Researchers continue to study which groups of women might benefit most from these drugs.
Clinical trials are also looking at whether some non-hormonal drugs might lower breast cancer risk, such as drugs used to treat blood or bone marrow disorders, like ruxolitinib.
Studies are looking at vaccines that might help prevent certain types of breast cancer in people who are at high risk for breast cancer (due to presence of hereditary gene mutations or breast cancer in the family).


New tests to personalize your treatment
Biomarkers
Breast cancer tissue is routinely tested for the biomarkers ER, PR, and HER2 to help make treatment decisions. A biomarker is any gene, protein, or other substance that can be measured in blood, tissues, or other body fluids. Some studies are looking at whether testing for other biomarkers, such as HER3, might also be helpful, but research on this is still in early phases.
Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) is DNA that is released into the bloodstream when cancer cells die. Identifying and testing the ctDNA in the blood for biomarkers is a rapidly growing area of study.
Some ways ctDNA might potentially be used in breast cancer include:

Looking for new biomarkers in the tumor cells that might mean the cancer has become resistant to specific treatments (like chemo or targeted drug therapy)
Determining if a certain drug will work on a tumor before trying it
Predicting if the breast cancer will recur (come back) in women with early-stage breast cancer
Predicting if neoadjuvant treatment is working  to destroy the tumor instead of using imaging tests like a CT scan or US
Determining if breast cancer or a high-risk breast condition is present before changes are found on an imaging test like a mammogram

New imaging tests
Newer types of tests are being developed for breast imaging. Some of these are already being used in certain situations, while others are still being studied. It will take time to see if they are as good as or better than those used today. Some of these tests include:

Scintimammography (molecular breast imaging)
Positron emission mammography (PEM)
Electrical impedance imaging (EIT)
Elastography
New types of optical imaging tests

For more on these tests, see Newer and Experimental Breast Imaging Tests. 
Breast cancer treatment
New kinds of treatments for breast cancer are always being studied. For example, in recent years, several new targeted drugs have been approved to treat breast cancer.
But more and better treatment options are needed, especially for cancers like triple-negative breast cancer, where chemotherapy is the main option.
Some areas of research involving breast cancer treatment include:

Studying if shorter courses of radiation therapy for very early-stage breast cancers are at least as good as the longer courses now often used
Testing if different types of radiation therapy, such as proton beam radiation, might be better than standard radiation.
Combining certain drugs (like 2 targeted drugs, a targeted drug with an immunotherapy drug, or a hormone drug with a targeted drug) to see if they work better together
Trying to find new drugs or drug combinations that might help treat breast cancer that has spread to the brain
Testing different immunotherapy drugs to treat triple-negative breast cancer
Giving cancer vaccines to see if this helps keep the cancer from either worsening or coming back after treatment. There are many ways in which cancer vaccines work. For example, protein vaccines stimulate the immune system to recognize and attack specific cancer proteins.  DNA vaccines contain DNA instructions so that once the vaccine is given, the DNA will instruct your body to make protein(s) to help the immune system recognize and attack cancer cells. 
Finding new ways to treat women with hereditary breast cancer, since they have a higher chance of the cancer recurring (coming back)
Determining if chemotherapy is needed to treat every woman with HER2-positive breast cancer
Finding new treatment options when breast cancer becomes resistant to current treatments

Supportive care
Supportive care helps patients and caregivers manage the symptoms of cancer and side effects of cancer treatment. Clinical trials are looking at different medicines and techniques to try to improve supportive care for people with breast cancer. For example, some studies are investigating:

If there are better medicines or ways to prevent the damage to nerves that sometimes happen with certain chemotherapy drugs


If drugs or other treatments might be helpful in limiting memory problems and other brain symptoms after chemotherapy
If certain heart or blood pressure drugs, can help prevent the heart damage sometimes caused by common breast cancer drugs such as doxorubicin and trastuzumab
If there are medicines that might be able to help treat the tired feeling that cancer can causeA risk factor is anything that increases your chances of getting a disease, such as breast cancer. But having a risk factor, or even many, does not mean that you are sure to get the disease. 
Certain breast cancer risk factors are related to personal behaviors, such as diet and physical activity. Other lifestyle-related risk factors include decisions about having children and taking medicines that contain hormones.
For information on other known and possible breast cancer risk factors, see:

Breast Cancer Risk Factors You Cannot Change
Factors with Unclear Effects on Breast Cancer Risk
Disproven or Controversial Breast Cancer Risk Factors

Drinking alcohol
Drinking alcohol is clearly linked to an increased risk of breast cancer. The risk increases with the amount of alcohol consumed. Women who have 1 alcoholic drink a day have a small (about 7% to 10%) increase in risk compared with those who don't drink, while women who have 2 to 3 drinks a day have about a 20% higher risk. Alcohol is linked to an increased risk of other types of cancer, too.
It is best not to drink alcohol. Women who do drink should have no more than 1 a day.
Being overweight or obese
Being overweight or obese after menopause increases breast cancer risk.
Before menopause, a woman's ovaries make most of her estrogen, and fat tissue makes only a small part of the total amount. After menopause (when the ovaries stop making estrogen), most estrogen comes from fat tissue. Having more fat tissue after menopause can raise estrogen levels and increase the chances of getting breast cancer.
Women who are overweight also tend to have higher blood insulin levels. Higher insulin levels have been linked to some cancers, including breast cancer.
Still, the link between weight and breast cancer risk is complex. For example:

The risk of breast cancer after menopause is higher for women who gained weight as an adult.
For women who are overweight or obese before menopause, the risk is actually lower.

The reasons for this aren’t exactly clear.
Weight might also have different effects on different types of breast cancer. For example:

Being overweight after menopause is more strongly linked with an increased risk of hormone receptor-positive breast cancer.
Some research suggests that being overweight before menopause might increase your risk of the less common triple-negative breast cancer.

The American Cancer Society recommends you stay at a healthy weight throughout your life and avoid excess weight gain by balancing your food and drink intake with physical activity.
Not being physically active
Evidence is growing that regular physical activity reduces breast cancer risk, especially in women past menopause. The main question is how much activity is needed. Some studies have found that even as little as a couple of hours a week might be helpful, although more seems to be better.
Exactly how physical activity might reduce breast cancer risk isn’t clear, but it may be due to its effects on body weight, inflammation, and hormone levels.
The American Cancer Society recommends that adults get 150 to 300 minutes of moderate intensity or 75 to 150 minutes of vigorous intensity activity each week (or a combination of these). Getting to or going over the upper limit of 300 minutes is ideal.
Not having children
Women who have not had children or who had their first child after age 30 have a slightly higher breast cancer risk overall. Having many pregnancies and becoming pregnant at a young age reduces breast cancer risk.
Still, the effect of pregnancy on breast cancer risk is complex. For example, the risk of breast cancer is higher for about the first decade after having a child. The risk then becomes lower over time.
Not breastfeeding
Most studies suggest that breastfeeding may slightly lower breast cancer risk, especially if it continues for a year or more. But this has been hard to study, especially in countries like the United States, where breastfeeding for this long is uncommon.
A possible explanation for this effect is that breastfeeding reduces a woman’s total number of lifetime menstrual cycles (the same as starting menstrual periods at a later age or going through early menopause).
Birth control
Some birth control methods use hormones, which might increase breast cancer risk.
Oral contraceptives: Most studies have found that women using oral contraceptives (birth control pills) have a slightly higher risk of breast cancer than women who have never used them. Once the pills are stopped, this risk seems to go back to normal within about 10 years.
Birth control shots: Some studies have suggested that getting long-acting progesterone shots (such as Depo-Provera) every 3 months for birth control might increase breast cancer risk, but not all studies have found this.
Birth control implants, intrauterine devices (IUDs), skin patches, vaginal rings: These forms of birth control also use hormones, which in theory could fuel breast cancer growth. Some studies have suggested a link between use of hormone-releasing IUDs and breast cancer risk, but few studies have looked at the use of birth control implants, patches, and rings and breast cancer risk.
Menopausal hormone therapy
Menopausal hormone therapy (MHT) with estrogen (often combined with progesterone) has been used for many years to help relieve symptoms of menopause and help prevent osteoporosis (thinning of the bones). This treatment also goes by other names, such as post-menopausal hormone therapy (PHT) and hormone replacement therapy (HRT).
There are 2 main types of hormone therapy:

For women who still have a uterus (womb), doctors generally prescribe estrogen and progesterone (known as combined hormone therapy, or just HT). Progesterone is needed because estrogen alone can increase the risk of cancer of the uterus.
For women who’ve had a hysterectomy (who no longer have a uterus), estrogen alone can be used. This is known as estrogen replacement therapy (ERT) or just estrogen therapy (ET).

Combined hormone therapy (HT): Use of combined hormone therapy after menopause increases the risk of breast cancer. This increase in risk is typically seen after about 4 years of use. Combined HT also increases the likelihood that the cancer may be found at a more advanced stage.
The increased risk from combined HT appears to apply mainly to current and recent users. A woman’s breast cancer risk seems to go back down within about 5 years of stopping treatment, although the increased risk does not go away completely.
Bioidentical hormone therapy: The word bioidentical is sometimes used to describe versions of estrogen and progesterone with the same chemical structure as those found naturally in people (as opposed to the slightly different versions found in most medicines). The use of these hormones has been marketed as a safe way to treat the symptoms of menopause. But because there aren’t many studies comparing “bioidentical” or “natural” hormones to synthetic versions of hormones, there’s no proof that they’re safer or more effective. More studies are needed to know for sure. Until then, the use of these bioidentical hormones should be considered to have the same health risks as any other type of hormone therapy.
Estrogen therapy (ET): Studies of the use of estrogen alone after menopause have had mixed results. Some have found a slightly higher risk, while others have found no increase in risk, or even a slight decrease in risk. If ET does increase the risk of breast cancer, it is not by much.
At this time there aren't many strong reasons to use post-menopausal hormone therapy (either combined HT or ET), other than possibly for the short-term relief of menopausal symptoms. Along with the increased risk of breast cancer, combined HT also appears to increase the risk of heart disease, blood clots, and strokes. It does lower the risk of colorectal cancer and osteoporosis, but this must be weighed against the possible harms, especially since there are other ways to prevent and treat osteoporosis, and screening can sometimes prevent colon cancer. While it's not clear if ET increases breast cancer risk, it does increase the risk of stroke.
The decision to use HT should be made by a woman and her doctor after weighing the possible risks and benefits (including the severity of her menopausal symptoms), and considering her other risk factors for heart disease, breast cancer, and osteoporosis. If they decide she should try HT for symptoms of menopause, it’s usually best to use it at the lowest dose that works for her and for as short a time as possible.
To learn more, see Menopausal Hormone Therapy and Cancer Risk.
Breast implants
Breast implants have not been linked with an increased risk of the most common types of breast cancer.
However, in rare cases they have been linked with some other types of cancer, including breast implant-associated anaplastic large cell lymphoma (BIA-ALCL) and other lymphomas, as well as squamous cell carcinoma. These cancers can form in the scar tissue (capsule) around the implant, and they might show up as a lump, a collection of fluid, swelling, or pain, or skin changes near the implant, or as a change in breast size or shape.A risk factor is anything that increases your chances of getting a disease, such as breast cancer. But having a risk factor, or even many, does not mean that you are sure to get the disease.
Some risk factors for breast cancer are things you cannot change, such as getting older or inheriting certain gene changes. These make your risk of breast cancer higher.
For information on other known and possible breast cancer risk factors, see:

Lifestyle-related Breast Cancer Risk Factors
Factors with Unclear Effects on Breast Cancer Risk
Disproven or Controversial Breast Cancer Risk Factors

Being born female
This is the main risk factor for breast cancer. Men can get breast cancer, too, but this disease is much more common in women than in men.
Getting older
As you get older, your risk of breast cancer goes up. Most breast cancers are found in women age 55 and older.
Inheriting certain gene changes
About 5% to 10% of breast cancer cases are thought to be hereditary, meaning that they result directly from gene changes (mutations) passed on from a parent.
BRCA1 and BRCA2: The most common cause of hereditary breast cancer is an inherited mutation in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene. In normal cells, these genes help make proteins that repair damaged DNA. Mutated versions of these genes can lead to abnormal cell growth, which can lead to cancer.

If you have inherited a mutated copy of either gene from a parent, you have a higher risk of breast cancer.
On average, a woman with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutation has up to a 7 in 10 chance of getting breast cancer by age 80. This risk is also affected by how many other family members have had breast cancer. (It goes up if more family members are affected.)  
Women with one of these mutations are more likely to be diagnosed with breast cancer at a younger age, as well as to have cancer in both breasts.
Women with one of these gene changes also have a higher risk of developing ovarian cancer and some other cancers. (Men who inherit one of these gene changes also have a higher risk of breast and some other cancers.)
In the United States, BRCA mutations are more common in Jewish people of Ashkenazi (Eastern Europe) origin than in other racial and ethnic groups, but anyone can have them.

Other genes: Other gene mutations can also lead to inherited breast cancers. These gene mutations are much less common, and most of them do not increase the risk of breast cancer as much as the BRCA genes.

ATM: The ATM gene normally helps repair damaged DNA (or helps kill the cell if the damaged can't be fixed). Inheriting 2 abnormal copies of this gene causes the disease ataxia-telangiectasia. Inheriting one abnormal copy of this gene has been linked to a high rate of breast cancer in some families.
PALB2: The PALB2 gene makes a protein that interacts with the protein made by the BRCA2 gene. Mutations in this gene can lead to a higher risk of breast cancer.
TP53: The TP53 gene helps stop the growth of cells with damaged DNA. Inherited mutations of this gene cause Li-Fraumeni syndrome. People with this syndrome have an increased risk of breast cancer, as well as some other cancers such as leukemia, brain tumors, and sarcomas (cancers of bones or connective tissue). This mutation is a rare cause of breast cancer.
CHEK2:  The CHEK2 gene is another gene that normally helps with DNA repair. A CHEK2 mutation increases breast cancer risk.
PTEN: The PTEN gene normally helps regulate cell growth. Inherited mutations in this gene can cause Cowden syndrome, a rare disorder that puts people at higher risk for both cancer and benign (non-cancer) tumors in the breasts, as well as growths in the digestive tract, thyroid, uterus, and ovaries.
CDH1: Inherited mutations in this gene cause hereditary diffuse gastric cancer, a syndrome in which people develop a rare type of stomach cancer. Women with mutations in this gene also have an increased risk of invasive lobular breast cancer.
STK11: Defects in this gene can lead to Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. People affected with this disorder have pigmented spots on their lips and in their mouths, polyps (abnormal growths) in the urinary and digestive tracts, and a higher risk of many types of cancer, including breast cancer.

Inherited mutations in several other genes have also been linked to breast cancer, but these account for only a small number of cases.
Genetic counseling and testing: Genetic testing can be done to look for inherited mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes (or less commonly in genes such as PTEN, TP53, or others mentioned above). This might be an option for some women who have been diagnosed with breast cancer, as well as for certain women with factors that put them at higher risk for breast cancer, such as a strong family history. While genetic testing can be helpful in some cases, not every woman needs to be tested, and the pros and cons need to be considered carefully. To learn more, see Genetic Counseling and Testing for Breast Cancer Risk.
Having a family history of breast cancer
It’s important to note that most women who get breast cancer do not have a family history of the disease. But women who have close blood relatives with breast cancer have a higher risk:

Having a first-degree relative (mother, sister, or daughter) with breast cancer almost doubles a woman’s risk. Having 2 first-degree relatives increases her risk by about 3-fold.
Women with a father or brother who has had breast cancer also have a higher risk of breast cancer.

Having a personal history of breast cancer
A woman with cancer in one breast has a higher risk of developing a new cancer in the other breast or in another part of the same breast. (This is different from a recurrence or return of the first cancer.) Although this risk is low overall, it's even higher for younger women with breast cancer.
Race and ethnicity
Overall, White women are slightly more likely to develop breast cancer than African American women, although the gap between them has been closing in recent years. In women under age 40, breast cancer is more common in African American women. African American women are also more likely to die from breast cancer at any age. Asian, Hispanic, and Native American women have a lower risk of developing and dying from breast cancer.
Risk in different groups also varies by type of breast cancer. For example, African American women are more likely to have the less common triple-negative breast cancer.
Being taller
Many studies have found that taller women have a higher risk of breast cancer than shorter women. The reasons for this aren’t exactly clear, but it may have something to do with factors that affect early growth, such as nutrition early in life, as well as hormonal or genetic factors.
Having dense breast tissue
Breasts are made up of fatty tissue, fibrous tissue, and glandular tissue. Breasts appear denser on a mammogram when they have more glandular and fibrous tissue and less fatty tissue. Women with dense breasts on mammogram have a higher risk of breast cancer than women with average breast density. Unfortunately, dense breast tissue can also make it harder to see cancers on mammograms.
A number of factors can affect breast density, such as age, menopausal status, the use of certain drugs (including menopausal hormone therapy), pregnancy, and genetics.
To learn more, see our information on breast density and mammograms.
Having certain benign breast conditions
Women diagnosed with certain types of benign (non-cancer) breast conditions may have a higher risk of breast cancer. Some of these conditions are more closely linked to breast cancer risk than others. Doctors often divide benign breast conditions into different groups, depending on how they affect this risk.
Non-proliferative lesions: These conditions don’t seem to affect breast cancer risk, or if they do, the increase in risk is very small. They include:

Fibrosis and/or simple cysts (sometimes called fibrocystic changes)
Mild hyperplasia
Adenosis (non-sclerosing)
Phyllodes tumor (benign)
A single papilloma
Fat necrosis
Duct ectasia
Periductal fibrosis
Squamous and apocrine metaplasia
Epithelial-related calcifications
Other tumors (lipoma, hamartoma, hemangioma, neurofibroma, adenomyoepithelioma)

Mastitis (infection of the breast) is not a tumor and does not increase the risk of breast cancer.
Proliferative lesions without atypia (cell abnormalities): In these conditions there’s excessive growth of cells in the ducts or lobules of the breast, but the cells don't look very abnormal. These conditions seem to raise a woman’s risk of breast cancer slightly. They include:

Usual ductal hyperplasia (without atypia)
Fibroadenoma
Sclerosing adenosis
Several papillomas (called papillomatosis)
Radial scar

Proliferative lesions with atypia: In these conditions, the cells in the ducts or lobules of the breast tissue grow excessively, and some of them no longer look normal. These types of lesions include:

Atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH)
Atypical lobular hyperplasia (ALH)

Breast cancer risk is about 4 to 5 times higher than normal in women with these changes. If a woman also has a family history of breast cancer and either hyperplasia or atypical hyperplasia, she has an even higher risk of breast cancer.
Lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS)
In LCIS, cells that look like cancer cells are growing in the lobules of the milk-producing glands of the breast, but they are not growing through the wall of the lobules. LCIS is not considered to be cancer, and it typically does not spread beyond the lobule (that is, it doesn't become invasive breast cancer) if it isn’t treated. But women with LCIS have a 7 to 12 times higher risk of developing breast cancer (which can be in either breast).
For more on these conditions, see Non-cancerous Breast Conditions.
Starting menstrual periods early
Women who have had more menstrual cycles because they started menstruating early (especially before age 12) have a slightly higher risk of breast cancer. The increase in risk may be due to a longer lifetime exposure to the hormones estrogen and progesterone.
Going through menopause later
Women who have had more menstrual cycles because they went through menopause later (typically after age 55) have a slightly higher risk of breast cancer. The increase in risk may be because they have a longer lifetime exposure to the hormones estrogen and progesterone.
Having radiation to your chest
Women who were treated with radiation therapy to the chest for another cancer (such as Hodgkin or non-Hodgkin lymphoma) when they were younger have a significantly higher risk for breast cancer. This risk depends on their age when they got radiation. The risk is highest for women who had radiation as a teen or young adult, when the breasts were still developing. Radiation treatment in older women (after about age 40 to 45) does not seem to increase breast cancer risk.
Exposure to diethylstilbestrol (DES)
From the 1940s through the early 1970s some pregnant women were given an estrogen-like drug called DES because it was thought to lower their chances of losing the baby (miscarriage). These women have a slightly increased risk of developing breast cancer. Women whose mothers took DES while they were pregnant with them may also have a slightly higher risk of breast cancer.
To learn more, see our information about DES exposure.There are some things that might be risk factors for breast cancer, but the research is not yet clear about whether they really affect breast cancer risk.
For information on other known and possible breast cancer risk factors, see:

Lifestyle-related Breast Cancer Risk Factors
Breast Cancer Risk Factors You Cannot Change
Disproven or Controversial Breast Cancer Risk Factors

Diet and vitamins
While being overweight or obese and not being physically active have been linked to breast cancer risk, the possible link between diet and breast cancer risk is less clear.  Results of some studies have suggested that diet may play a role, while others have not found that diet influences breast cancer risk.
Studies of women in the United States have not found a consistent link between high-fat diets and getting breast cancer, although some studies have found a possible link between high-fat diets and a higher risk of dying from breast cancer. Studies have also found that breast cancer is less common in countries where the typical diet is low in total fat, low in polyunsaturated fat, and low in saturated fat. Researchers are still not sure how to explain this. Studies comparing diet and breast cancer risk in different countries are complicated by other differences (such as activity level, intake of other nutrients, and genetic factors) that might also affect breast cancer risk.
We do know that high-fat diets can lead to being overweight or obese, which is a known breast cancer risk factor. A diet high in fat is also a risk factor for some other types of cancer. And eating certain types of fat is clearly linked to a higher risk of heart disease.
Some studies have also suggested that diets high in fruits and vegetables and calcium-rich dairy products, but low in red and processed meats might lower the risk of breast cancer. This remains an active area of research.
Several studies looking at women in Asian countries have found that diets high in soy products might lower breast cancer risk. But this link has not been as clear in studies looking at women in Western countries. This might be because Asian women generally eat more soy products (and start at an earlier age) than Western women.
Studies looking at vitamin levels in the body have had inconsistent results. So far, there’s no strong evidence that taking vitamins (or any other type of dietary supplement) reduces the risk of breast cancer. 
The lack of a strong link between diet and breast cancer in studies so far doesn’t mean that there’s no point in eating a healthy diet. A diet low in fat, red meat, and processed meat and high in fruits and vegetables can have many health benefits, including lowering the risk of some other types of cancer.
Chemicals in the environment
A great deal of research has been reported and more is being done to understand possible environmental influences on breast cancer risk.
Chemicals in the environment that have estrogen-like properties are of special interest. For example, substances found in some plastics, certain cosmetics and personal care products, pesticides, and PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyls) seem to have such properties. In theory, these could affect breast cancer risk.
At this time research does not show a clear link between breast cancer risk and exposure to these substances, but it is hard to study such effects in humans. More studies are needed in this area.
Tobacco smoke
Some studies have found that heavy smoking over a long time might be linked to a slightly higher risk of breast cancer. In some studies, the risk has been highest in certain groups, such as women who started smoking before they had their first child. The 2014 US Surgeon General’s report on smoking concluded that there is “suggestive but not sufficient” evidence that smoking increases the risk of breast cancer.
Researchers are also looking at whether secondhand smoke increases the risk of breast cancer. Both mainstream and secondhand smoke contain chemicals that, in high concentrations, cause breast cancer in rodents. Studies in rodents have shown that chemicals in tobacco smoke reach breast tissue and are found in breast milk. In human studies, the evidence on secondhand smoke and breast cancer risk is not clear. Most studies have not found a link, but some studies have suggested it might increase risk, particularly in premenopausal women. The 2014 US Surgeon General’s report concluded that there is “suggestive but not sufficient” evidence of a link at this point. In any case, this possible link to breast cancer is yet another reason to avoid secondhand smoke.
Night shift work
Women who work at night, such as nurses on a night shift, might have an increased risk of breast cancer. This is an active area of research. This effect may be due to changes in levels of melatonin, a hormone that’s affected by the body’s exposure to light, but other hormones are also being studied.There are some factors that research has shown are not linked to breast cancer. You may see information online or hear about these disproven or controversial risk factors, but it's important to learn the facts. 
For information on known and possible breast cancer risk factors, see:

Lifestyle-related Breast Cancer Risk Factors
Breast Cancer Risk Factors You Cannot Change
Factors with Unclear Effects on Breast Cancer Risk

Antiperspirants
Online and social media rumors have suggested that chemicals in underarm antiperspirants are absorbed through the skin, interfere with lymph circulation, and cause toxins to build up in the breast, eventually leading to breast cancer.
Based on the available evidence (including what we know about how the body works), there is little if any reason to believe that antiperspirants increase the risk of breast cancer. For more information, see Antiperspirants and Breast Cancer Risk.
Bras
Online and social media rumors and at least one book have suggested that bras cause breast cancer by obstructing lymph flow. There is no scientific or clinical basis for this claim, and a 2014 study of more than 1,500 women found no association between wearing a bra and breast cancer risk.
Induced abortion
Several studies have provided very strong data that neither induced abortions nor spontaneous abortions (miscarriages) have an overall effect on the risk of breast cancer. For more detailed information, see Abortion and Breast Cancer Risk.There is no sure way to prevent breast cancer. But there are things you can do that might lower your risk. Many risk factors are beyond your control, such as being born female and getting older. But other risk factors can be changed and may lower your risk.
For women who are known to be at increased risk for breast cancer, there are additional steps that might reduce the risk of developing breast cancer.
For all women
Get to and stay at a healthy weight: Both increased body weight and weight gain as an adult are linked with a higher risk of breast cancer after menopause. The American Cancer Society recommends you stay at a healthy weight throughout your life and avoid excess weight gain by balancing your food intake with physical activity.
Be physically active: Many studies have shown that moderate to vigorous physical activity is linked with lower breast cancer risk, so it’s important to get regular physical activity. The American Cancer Society recommends that adults get at least 150 to 300 minutes of moderate intensity or 75 to 150 minutes of vigorous intensity activity each week (or a combination of these), preferably spread throughout the week. Getting to or exceeding the upper limit of 300 minutes is ideal.



Moderate activity is anything that makes you breathe as hard as you do during a brisk walk. It causes a slight increase in heart rate and breathing. You should be able to talk, but not sing during the activity. Vigorous activities are performed at a higher intensity. They cause an increased heart rate, sweating, and a faster breathing rate.



Avoid or limit alcohol: Alcohol increases risk of breast cancer. Even drinking small amounts of alcohol has been linked with an increase in risk. It is best not to drink alcohol at all. For women who do drink, they should have no more than 1 alcoholic drink a day. A drink is 12 ounces of beer, 5 ounces of wine, or 1.5 ounces of 80-proof distilled spirits (hard liquor).



Is there a link between diet/vitamins and breast cancer risk? The possible link between diet and breast cancer risk is not clear, but this is an active area of study. Some (but not all) studies have suggested that a diet that is high in vegetables, fruit, and calcium-rich dairy products, but low in red and processed meats might help lower the risk of breast cancer. It's also not clear if specific vegetables, fruits, or other foods can lower risk. And most studies have not found that lowering fat intake has much of an effect on breast cancer risk (although some have suggested it might help lower the risk of dying from breast cancer). But just because the science isn't clear on this doesn't mean that there’s no point in eating a healthy diet. A diet low in fat, processed and red meat, and sugary drinks, but high in fruits and vegetables can have many health benefits, including lowering the risk of some other types of cancer. So far, there's no strong evidence that taking vitamins or any other type of dietary supplement reduces the risk of breast cancer.



For more on the links between body weight, physical activity, diet, alcohol, and the risk of breast cancer (as well as other cancers), see the American Cancer Society Guidelines for Diet and Physical Activity for Cancer Prevention.
Other factors that might lower risk: Women who choose to breastfeed for at least several months after childbirth may also get an added benefit of reducing their breast cancer risk.
Using hormone therapy after menopause can increase your risk of breast cancer. To avoid this, talk to your health care provider about non-hormonal options to treat menopausal symptoms.
For women at increased risk of breast cancer
If you are at increased risk for breast cancer (for instance, because you have a strong family history of breast cancer, a known inherited gene mutation that increases breast cancer risk, such as in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene, or you have had DCIS or LCIS), there are some things you can consider that might help lower your chances of developing breast cancer (or help find it early):

Genetic counseling and testing for breast cancer risk (if it hasn’t been done already)
Medicines to lower breast cancer risk
Preventive (prophylactic) surgery
Close observation to look for early signs of breast cancer

Your health care provider can help you determine your risk of breast cancer, as well as which, if any, of these options might be right for you.
Genetic counseling and testing
If there are reasons to think you might have inherited a gene change that increases your risk of breast cancer (such having as a strong family history of breast cancer, or a family member with a known gene mutation), you might want to talk to your doctor about genetic counseling to see if you should be tested. To learn more, see Genetic Counseling and Testing for Breast Cancer Risk.
If you decide to be tested and a gene change is found, this might affect your decision about using the options below to help lower your risk for breast cancer (or find it early)
Medicines to lower breast cancer risk
Prescription medicines can be used to help lower breast cancer risk in certain women at increased risk of breast cancer.
Medicines such as tamoxifen and raloxifene block the action of estrogen in breast tissue. Tamoxifen might be an option even if you haven’t gone through menopause, while raloxifene is only used for women who have gone through menopause. Other drugs, called aromatase inhibitors, might also be an option for women past menopause. All of these medicines can also have side effects, so it’s important to understand the possible benefits and risks of taking one of them.
To learn more, see:

Deciding Whether to Use Medicine to Reduce Breast Cancer Risk
Tamoxifen and Raloxifene for Lowering Breast Cancer Risk
Aromatase Inhibitors for Lowering Breast Cancer Risk

Preventive surgery for women with very high breast cancer risk
For the small fraction of women who have a very high risk of breast cancer, such as from a BRCA gene mutation, surgery to remove the breasts (prophylactic mastectomy) may be an option. Another option might be to remove the ovaries, which are the main source of estrogen in the body. While surgery can lower the risk of breast cancer, it can’t eliminate it completely, and it can have its own side effects. For more on this topic, see Preventive Surgery to Reduce Breast Cancer Risk.
Before deciding if any of these options might be right for you, talk with your health care provider to understand your risk of breast cancer and how much these approaches might affect your risk.
Close observation
For women at increased breast cancer risk who don’t want to take medicines or have surgery, some doctors might recommend close observation. This approach might include:

More frequent doctor visits (such as every 6 to 12 months) for breast exams and ongoing risk assessment
Starting breast cancer screening with yearly mammograms at a younger age
Possibly adding another screening test, such as breast MRI

While this approach doesn’t lower breast cancer risk, it might help find it early, when it’s likely to be easier to treat.Some people inherit changes (mutations) in certain genes that increase their risk of breast cancer (and possibly other cancers). Genetic testing can look for mutations in some of these genes. While it can be helpful in some cases, not everyone needs to be tested, and each person should carefully consider the pros and cons of testing. It’s very important to understand what genetic testing can and can’t tell you before these tests are done.
Inherited gene changes that can increase breast cancer risk 
BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutations
When it comes to breast cancer risk, the most important inherited gene changes are in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. Women (and men) with one of these gene changes are said to have Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer (HBOC) syndrome. 

Women with a BRCA gene change have a greatly increased risk of breast cancer, as well as an increased risk of ovarian cancer, pancreatic cancer, and possibly some other cancers. 
Men with a BRCA gene change are at increased risk of breast cancer (although this risk is lower than in women to begin with), prostate cancer, pancreatic cancer, and possibly some other cancers. 

If you have a family history of breast cancer, you have a higher risk of getting breast cancer yourself. Most women with a family history of breast cancer do not have an inherited gene change that greatly affects their risk. Still, an inherited gene change is more likely in women with a strong family history of breast cancer, especially if the family history also includes certain other cancers, such as ovarian, pancreatic, or prostate cancer. The risk of having an inherited syndrome is also affected by:

Which family members are affected (Cancer in close relatives such as a mother or sister is more concerning than cancer in more distant relatives.) 
The number of family members affected
The age when your relatives were diagnosed (Cancer occurring at a younger age is more of a concern.)

Other inherited gene mutations
Inherited changes in some other genes can also increase breast cancer risk, including these genes:

PALB2
CHEK2
ATM
CDH1 (linked with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer)
PTEN (linked with Cowden syndrome)
TP53 (linked with Li-Fraumeni syndrome)

Considering genetic counseling and testing for breast cancer risk 
If you're concerned about your risk because of a personal or family history of breast cancer, talk with your doctor. As a first step, your doctor might use one of several risk assessment tools that are now available. These mathematical models use your family history and other factors to help give you and your doctor a better idea about your risk of having an inherited BRCA gene mutation. But these assessment tools aren't perfect, and each one might give different results, so doctors are still trying to figure out how best to use them.
Regardless of whether one of these tools is used, your doctor might suggest you could benefit from speaking with a genetic counselor or other health professional who is trained in genetic counseling. They can review your family history in detail to see how likely it is that you have a family cancer syndrome such as HBOC. The counselor can also describe genetic testing to you and explain what the tests might be able to tell you, which can help you decide if genetic testing is right for you. 
Genetic testing is covered by many health insurance plans, but it might not be covered (or might be covered only partially) by some of them.
If you do decide to get tested, the genetic counselor (or other health professional) can also help explain what the results mean, both for you and possibly other family members. To learn more about genetic testing in general, see Genetics and Cancer.
Testing for BRCA and other gene mutations
Some expert groups have developed guidelines for which women (and men) should consider genetic counseling and possibly testing for BRCA and other gene mutations. These guidelines can be complex, and not all doctors agree with them, but in general they include two main groups of people:
Women who have already been diagnosed with breast cancer: Most doctors agree that not all women with breast cancer need genetic counseling and testing. But counseling and testing is more likely to be helpful if: 

You were diagnosed with breast cancer at a younger age
You have triple-negative breast cancer
You have been diagnosed with a second breast cancer (not a recurrence of the first cancer)
You are of Ashkenazi Jewish descent
You have a family history of breast cancer (especially at a younger age or in men), ovarian cancer, pancreatic cancer, or prostate cancer

Other groups of people: Genetic counseling and testing might also be recommended for other people who are at higher risk for inherited gene mutations, including:

People with a known family history of a BRCA (or other) gene mutation
Women diagnosed with ovarian cancer or pancreatic cancer, or men diagnosed with breast cancer, pancreatic cancer, or high-grade or metastatic prostate cancer
People with a family history of breast cancer at a younger age, more than one family member with breast cancer, or breast cancer in a male family member
People with a close family member with a history of ovarian cancer, pancreatic cancer, or metastatic prostate cancer

How genetic testing is done
Genetic testing can be done on samples of blood or saliva, or from a swab of the inside of a cheek. The samples are sent to a lab for testing.
There are many different possible mutations in the BRCA genes. Testing can look for one (or a few) specific mutation(s), or more extensive testing can be done to look for many different BRCA mutations. For example, if someone is being tested because they have a family member with a known BRCA mutation, testing might focus only on that specific mutation. In people of Ashkenazi Jewish descent, testing might focus on the specific BRCA mutations that are most common in this group of people. But if there’s no reason to suspect a specific gene change, testing will likely look for many different BRCA mutations. Depending on the situation, testing might be done to look for changes in other genes as well.
Getting the results of genetic testing
Before getting genetic testing, it’s important to know ahead of time what the results might or might not tell you about your risk. Genetic testing is not perfect. The tests might not provide clear answers for some people. This is why meeting with a genetic counselor or cancer genetics professional is important, even before being tested.
The results of genetic testing might come back as:

Positive for a mutation that was tested for. If the test does find an important mutation, there might be steps you can take to help lower your risk of breast cancer (or other cancers). If you’ve already been diagnosed with breast cancer, a positive result might affect your breast cancer treatment options.
Negative for the mutation(s) tested for. It can be reassuring to find out that the test didn’t find a mutation that increases your risk. But it’s important to know that genetic test results can’t always guarantee that you’re not at increased risk. For instance, there might be a chance that you have a gene change that is not currently being tested for.
Inconclusive. In some cases, the test might not be able to tell for sure if you have a gene mutation.
Positive for a variant of unknown significance (VUS). This means that the test found a gene change (variant), but it’s not known if this particular change affects your risk.

To learn more about these different types of test results, see What Happens During Genetic Testing for Cancer Risk?
The results of genetic testing can sometimes be complex or confusing, which is why it’s important to go over them with a genetic counselor or cancer genetics professional. They can explain what they might mean for you (and possibly other family members).
Direct-to-consumer genetic tests
Some genetic tests are now available directly to the public, but there are some concerns with these types of tests. For example, a test that looks for a small number of BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutations has been approved by the FDA. However, there are more than 1,000 known BRCA mutations. This means there are many BRCA mutations that would not be detected by this test. People with a negative test result might assume they don’t have to be concerned about their risk, when in fact they might still have a different BRCA mutation.
Our section on genetics and cancer has more information about genetic mutations and testing for them.For women with a higher-than-average risk of breast cancer, some medicines can help reduce this risk. But these drugs can also have side effects, so it’s important to weigh their pros and cons before deciding to take one.
Taking medicines to help lower the risk of getting a disease is called chemoprevention. The most commonly used medicines to lower breast cancer risk are tamoxifen and raloxifene. Other medicines called aromatase inhibitors (such as anastrozole and exemestane) might also be options.
Should I take a drug to help reduce my breast cancer risk?
The first step in deciding if you should take a drug to help lower your chances of getting breast cancer is to have a health care provider assess your breast cancer risk.
Most experts say that your breast cancer risk should be higher than average for you to consider taking one of these drugs. If you do have a higher-than-average risk, you need to compare the benefit of possibly reducing your chance of getting breast cancer with the risk of side effects and other problems from taking one of these drugs.
Am I at higher risk for breast cancer?
A risk factor is anything that raises your risk of getting a disease. Your risk factors will need to be assessed to find out if you are at higher-than-average risk for breast cancer. But keep in mind that having risk factors does not mean that you will definitely develop breast cancer. In fact, most women who have one or more risk factors never develop breast cancer.
Some important risk factors for breast cancer include:

Getting older
Having close relatives who have had breast cancer
Having a longer menstrual history (more total menstrual cycles)
Having had invasive breast cancer or ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) before
Being diagnosed with lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS)
Being diagnosed with atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH) or atypical lobular hyperplasia (ALH)
Having a gene mutation linked to a family cancer syndrome (such as a BRCA mutation)

Some of these factors can increase your risk more than others.
How is breast cancer risk assessed?
Researchers have built some statistical models to help predict a woman’s risk of getting breast cancer.
For example, the Breast Cancer Risk Assessment Tool (based on the modified Gail Model) is commonly used to assess risk. It can estimate your risk of getting breast cancer in the next 5 years and over your lifetime, based on many of the factors listed above.
This tool only looks at family history in close relatives (like siblings, parents, and children), though. And it can't be used to estimate risk if you have a history of ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS), or breast cancer, or if you have a family cancer syndrome.
Also, the data that this tool is based on didn’t include American Indian or Alaskan Native women, so estimates for these women may not be accurate.
Other risk assessment tools, such as the Tyrer-Cuzick model and the Claus model, are based largely on family history. These tools﻿ are used mainly by genetic counselors and other health care professionals.
These tools can give you a rough estimate of your risk, but no tool or test can tell for sure if you’ll develop breast cancer.
How high does my risk need to be?
There is no single definition of a higher-than-average risk of breast cancer. But most major studies have used a 1.7% risk of developing breast cancer over the next 5 years as their cut-off point. (This is the average risk for a 60-year-old woman.)
Some medical organizations recommend that doctors discuss the use of medicines to lower breast cancer risk in women at least 35 years old who have a 5-year risk of 1.7% or higher. Others might use different cutoff points.
The American Cancer Society does not have recommendations for using medicines to help lower the risk of breast cancer.
Are there reasons not to take one of these drugs to help reduce breast cancer risk?
All drugs have risks and side effects that must be discussed when making the decision about chemoprevention.
Most experts agree that tamoxifen and raloxifene should not be used to reduce breast cancer risk in women who:

Have a higher risk of serious blood clots*
Are pregnant or planning to become pregnant
Are breastfeeding
Are taking estrogen (including birth control pills or shots, or menopausal hormone therapy)
Are taking an aromatase inhibitor
Are younger than 35 years old

*Women who have a higher risk of serious blood clots include those who have ever had serious blood clots (deep venous thrombosis [DVT] or a pulmonary embolism [PE]). Many doctors also feel that if you’ve had a stroke or heart attack, or if you smoke, are obese, or have (or are being treated for) high blood pressure or diabetes, you also have a higher risk of serious blood clots. Women with any of these conditions should ask their doctors if the benefits of taking one of these drugs would outweigh the risks.
A woman who has been diagnosed with any type of uterine cancer or atypical hyperplasia of the uterus (a kind of pre-cancer) should not take tamoxifen to help lower breast cancer risk.
Raloxifene has not been tested in pre-menopausal women, so it should only be used if you have gone through menopause.
Aromatase inhibitors are not useful for pre-menopausal women, so they should only be used if you have gone through menopause. These drugs can cause bone thinning (osteoporosis), so they’re not likely to be a good option in women who already have thin or weakened bones.  
Talk with your doctor about your total health picture to make the best possible choice for you. 
To learn more about the use of these medicines for chemoprevention, see:

Tamoxifen and Raloxifene for Lowering Breast Cancer Risk
Aromatase Inhibitors for Lowering Breast Cancer RiskTamoxifen and raloxifene have been shown to reduce the risk of breast cancer in women with a higher-than-average risk, but these drugs can have their own risks and side effects. Tamoxifen and raloxifene are the only drugs approved in the US to help lower the risk of breast cancer, although for some women, other drugs called aromatase inhibitors might be an option as well. 
What kind of drugs are tamoxifen and raloxifene?
Both of these drugs are selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs). This means that they act against (or block) estrogen (a female hormone) in some tissues of the body, but act like estrogen in others. Estrogen can fuel the growth of breast cancer cells. Both of these drugs block estrogen in breast cells, which is why they can be useful in lowering breast cancer risk.
These drugs are used more often for other reasons.

Tamoxifen is used mainly to treat hormone receptor-positive breast cancer (breast cancer with cells that have estrogen and/or progesterone receptors on them).
Raloxifene is used mostly to prevent and treat osteoporosis (very weak bones) in post-menopausal women.

When used to lower the risk of breast cancer, these drugs are typically taken for 5 years. Both drugs are pills taken once a day. Tamoxifen also comes in a liquid form.
Tamoxifen can be an option whether or not you have gone through menopause, but raloxifene is only approved for post-menopausal women.
To learn more about who should (and should not) consider taking one of these drugs, see Deciding Whether to Use Medicine to Reduce Breast Cancer Risk.
How much do these drugs lower the risk of breast cancer?
The effect of these drugs on breast cancer risk has varied in different studies. When the results of all the studies are taken together, the overall reduction in risk for these drugs is about 40% (more than a third).
What would this mean for me?
Although a medicine that cuts your risk by about 40% sounds like it must be a good thing, what it means for you depends on how high your risk is in the first place (your baseline risk).
For example, if you had a 5% risk of getting breast cancer in the next 5 years, you would be considered at increased risk. A 5% risk would mean that over the next 5 years, 5 of 100 women with your risk would be expected to get breast cancer. A 40% reduction in your risk would mean your risk goes down to 3%. This would be a 2% change overall.
Since the change in your overall risk depends on your baseline risk, you would benefit less if you had a lower baseline risk, and you would benefit more if your risk was higher. If you had a baseline risk of only 1.7% in the next 5 years (which is what many expert groups use as a cutoff point for being at 'increased risk'), a 40% change would mean that your risk would go down by less than 1% overall (to about 1%) in the next 5 years.
Your doctor can estimate your breast cancer risk based on factors like your age, medical history, and family history. This can help you see how much benefit you might get from taking one of these drugs.
Are there other benefits to taking these drugs?
Both tamoxifen and raloxifene can help prevent osteoporosis, a severe weakening of the bones that can increase the risk of bone fractures and is more common after menopause.
What are the main risks and side effects of taking these drugs?
Menopausal symptoms
The most common side effects of these drugs are symptoms of menopause. These include hot flashes and night sweats. Tamoxifen can also cause vaginal dryness and vaginal discharge. Pre-menopausal women taking tamoxifen can have menstrual changes. Menstrual periods can become irregular or even stop. Although periods often start again after the drug is stopped, they don’t always, and some women go into menopause. This is more likely in women who were close to menopause when they started taking the drug.
Other, more serious side effects are rare. These include serious blood clots and cancer of the uterus.
Blood clots
Both tamoxifen and raloxifene increase your risk of developing blood clots in a vein in your leg (deep venous thrombosis) or in your lungs (pulmonary embolism). These clots can sometimes cause serious problems, and even death. In the major studies looking at these drugs for breast cancer prevention, the overall risk of these blood clots over 5 years of treatment was less than 1%. This risk could be higher if you had a serious blood clot in the past, so these drugs are generally not recommended to lower breast cancer risk for anyone with a history of blood clots.
Because these drugs increase your risk of developing serious blood clots, there is also concern that they might also increase your risk of heart attack or stroke, although this is not clear. You might want to discuss this with your doctor, especially if you have a history of a heart attack or stroke, or if you are at increased risk for them. (See Deciding Whether to Use Medicine to Reduce Breast Cancer Risk.)
Cancers of the uterus
Because tamoxifen acts like estrogen in the uterus, it can increase your risk of cancers of the uterus, including endometrial cancer and uterine sarcoma. It's also linked to a higher risk of endometrial pre-cancers. The increased risk seems to affect women over 50, but not younger women.
The overall increase in the risk of uterine cancer with tamoxifen use is low (less than 1%), and it goes back to normal within a few years of stopping the drug.
If you have had a hysterectomy (surgery to remove the uterus), you are not at risk for endometrial cancer or uterine sarcoma and do not have to worry about these cancers.
If you are taking tamoxifen, tell your doctor if you have any abnormal vaginal bleeding or spotting, especially after menopause, as these are possible symptoms of uterine cancer.
Raloxifene does not act like estrogen in the uterus and is not linked to an increased risk of uterine cancer.For post-menopausal women with a higher-than-average risk of breast cancer who are considering taking medicine to lower their risk, drugs called aromatase inhibitors (AIs) may be an option instead of tamoxifen or raloxifene.
What are aromatase inhibitors?
Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) lower estrogen levels by stopping an enzyme in fat tissue (called aromatase) from changing other hormones into estrogen. (Estrogen can fuel the growth of breast cancer cells.)
These drugs don’t stop the ovaries from making estrogen. They only lower estrogen levels in women whose ovaries aren’t making estrogen (such as women who have already gone through menopause). Because of this, they are used mainly in women who have gone through menopause already.
The AIs that have been shown in studies to lower breast cancer risk include:

Anastrozole (Arimidex)
Exemestane (Aromasin)

Like tamoxifen, these drugs are more often used to treat hormone receptor-positive breast cancer than to lower breast cancer risk.
When used to lower breast cancer risk, these drugs are typically taken for 5 years. They are pills taken once a day.
Can aromatase inhibitors lower the risk of breast cancer?
In large studies, both anastrozole and exemestane have been shown to lower breast cancer risk in postmenopausal women who are at increased risk.
While these drugs are not FDA approved to lower breast cancer risk, some expert groups include them as options (along with tamoxifen and raloxifene) to reduce breast cancer risk in post-menopausal women at increased risk. For example, they might be a reasonable option for women who have an increased risk of blood clots and therefore should not take tamoxifen or raloxifene.
What are the risks and side effects of aromatase inhibitors?
The most common side effects of AIs are symptoms of menopause, such as hot flashes, night sweats, and vaginal dryness.
These drugs can also cause muscle and joint pain. This side effect can be serious enough to cause some women to stop taking the drugs.
Unlike tamoxifen and raloxifene, AIs tend to speed up bone thinning, which can lead to osteoporosis. People with osteoporosis are more likely to have broken bones. Because of this, doctors often recommend checking bone density before starting one of these drugs.
AIs may raise cholesterol. Women with pre-existing heart disease who take an AI may be at higher risk of having a heart problem.Some women who have a very high risk of breast cancer may choose preventive surgery to remove their breasts (prophylactic mastectomy) to lower their risk.
Should I consider surgery to lower my risk of breast cancer?
You might consider preventive surgery if you:

Have a mutation in the BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene (or certain other genes that increase breast cancer risk) that is found by genetic testing
Have a strong family history of breast cancer (such as breast cancer in several close relatives, or breast cancer in at least one relative at a young age)
Had radiation therapy to the chest before age 30
Have (or have had) cancer in one breast (especially if you also have a strong family history)

Like any type of surgery, a mastectomy can have risks and side effects, some of which could affect your quality of life. Because of this, preventive surgery is not usually a good option for women who are at average risk of breast cancer, or for those who are at only slightly increased risk.
For women who are known (or strongly suspected) to have a BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutation, a prophylactic oophorectomy (removal of the ovaries) might be recommended as well.
Prophylactic mastectomy
A prophylactic mastectomy is surgery to remove one or both breasts to lower the chances of getting breast cancer. There are different types of mastectomies that might be options.
A prophylactic mastectomy can lower breast cancer risk by 90% or more, but it doesn’t guarantee that you will not get breast cancer. This is because it's not possible to remove all breast cells, even with a mastectomy. The breast cells that are left behind might still go on to become cancer.
A prophylactic mastectomy might be considered in two main situations.
For women at very high risk of breast cancer
For women in this group, removing both breasts (known as a bilateral prophylactic mastectomy) before cancer is diagnosed can greatly reduce (but not eliminate) the risk of getting breast cancer. 
Unfortunately there’s no way to know for sure ahead of time if a woman will benefit from this surgery. Most women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutation will develop breast cancer at some point. Having a prophylactic mastectomy before the cancer develops might add many years to their lives. But not all women with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations develop breast cancer. For some women the surgery might not have been helpful. Although they might still get some important benefits from the surgery such as peace of mind, they would also have to deal with its aftereffects, which might include physical and emotional side effects.
For women already diagnosed with breast cancer
Some women who have already been diagnosed with breast cancer choose to have the other breast removed at the same time of surgery to remove the breast with cancer. This operation (known as a contralateral prophylactic mastectomy, or CPM) can help lower their risk of developing a second breast cancer. 
This is more likely to be a good option for women who also have other factors that increase their risk of getting another breast cancer, such as a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation or a strong family history of breast cancer.
But for women who don't have a family history or other risk factors for breast cancer, the benefit of CPM is less clear. Having breast cancer does raise your risk of getting cancer in the other breast, but this risk is still usually low, and many women overestimate this risk. And while CPM lowers the risk of getting cancer in the other breast, it does not increase most women's chances of living longer.  
Other issues might also be important when considering a CPM. For example, after a mastectomy, the breasts may no longer look the same, even if a woman has breast reconstruction. Removing both breasts (possibly followed by reconstruction) can help the breasts look more symmetrical after treatment.
Before having this type of surgery, it’s very important to talk with a member of your cancer care team﻿ or a genetic counselor so that you understand how much you might benefit from it, versus the likelihood of risks and side effects. You might also want to get a second medical opinion, as well as talk to others who have had this surgery, before deciding if it’s right for you.
Prophylactic oophorectomy (removal of the ovaries)
Women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation have a high risk of developing breast cancer and ovarian cancer. 
Most doctors recommend that women with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation have surgery to remove their ovaries (and usually the attached fallopian tubes as well) once they’ve finished having children. This operation, known as a prophylactic oophorectomy, greatly reduces the risk of ovarian cancer. Some studies have suggested it might lower the risk of breast cancer as well, although not all studies have found this. Some women choose to have this surgery done along with a prophylactic mastectomy.
Removing the ovaries causes a woman to go into menopause. This can lead to symptoms such as hot flashes, trouble sleeping, vaginal dryness, loss of bone density, and anxiety or depression. 
Again, it’s important to talk to your health care team so that you’re well informed about the possible benefits, risks, and side effects of this type of surgery. You might also want to talk to other women who have had this surgery before deciding if it’s right for you.
Other options to reduce breast cancer risk
If you’re concerned about your breast cancer risk, talk to your health care provider. They can help you estimate your risk based on your age, family history, and other factors. If you are at increased risk, you might consider taking medicines that can help lower your risk. Your health care provider might also suggest you have more intensive screening for breast cancer, which might include starting screening at a younger age or having other tests in addition to mammography.
There are also other things that all women can do to help lower their risk of breast cancer, such as being active, staying at a healthy weight, and limiting or not drinking alcohol. For more information, see Can I Lower My Risk of Breast Cancer?Finding breast cancer early and getting state-of-the-art cancer treatment are two of the most important strategies for preventing deaths from breast cancer. Breast cancer that’s found early, when it’s small and has not spread, is easier to treat successfully. Getting regular screening tests is the most reliable way to find breast cancer early. The American Cancer Society has screening guidelines for women at average risk of breast cancer, and for those at high risk for breast cancer.
What are screening tests?
S﻿creening refers to tests and exams used to find a disease in people who don’t have any symptoms. The goal of screening tests for breast cancer is to find it early, before it causes symptoms (like a lump in the breast that can be felt). Early detection means finding and diagnosing a disease earlier than if you’d waited for symptoms to start.
Breast cancers found during screening exams are more likely to be smaller and less likely to have spread outside the breast. The size of a breast cancer and how far it has spread are some of the most important factors in predicting the prognosis (outlook) of a woman with this disease.
American Cancer Society screening recommendations for women at average breast cancer risk



These guidelines are for women at average risk for breast cancer. For screening purposes, a woman is considered to be at average risk if she doesn’t have a personal history of breast cancer, a strong family history of breast cancer, or a genetic mutation known to increase risk of breast cancer (such as in a BRCA gene), and has not had chest radiation therapy before the age of 30. (See below for guidelines for women at high risk.)

Women between 40 and 44 have the option to start screening with a mammogram every year.
Women 45 to 54 should get mammograms every year.
Women 55 and older can switch to a mammogram every other year, or they can choose to continue yearly mammograms. Screening should continue as long as a woman is in good health and is expected to live at least 10 more years.
All women should understand what to expect when getting a mammogram for breast cancer screening – what the test can and cannot do.

Clinical breast exams are not recommended for breast cancer screening among average-risk women at any age.
Mammograms
Mammograms are low-dose x-rays of the breast. Regular mammograms can help find breast cancer at an early stage, when treatment is most likely to be successful. A mammogram can often find breast changes that could be cancer years before physical symptoms develop. Results from many decades of research clearly show that women who have regular mammograms are more likely to have breast cancer found earlier, are less likely to need aggressive treatments like surgery to remove the entire breast (mastectomy) and chemotherapy, and are more likely to be cured.
Mammograms are not perfect. They miss some breast cancers. And if something is found on a screening mammogram, a woman will likely need other tests (such as more mammograms or a breast ultrasound) to find out if it is cancer. There’s also a small chance of being diagnosed with a cancer that never would have caused any problems had it not been found during screening. (This is called overdiagnosis.) It's important that women getting mammograms know what to expect and understand the benefits and limitations of screening.
2D vs. 3D mammograms
In recent years, a newer type of mammogram called digital breast tomosynthesis (commonly known as three-dimensional [3D] mammography) has become much more common, although it’s not available in all breast imaging centers.
Many studies have found that 3D mammography appears to lower the chance of being called back after screening for follow-up testing. It also appears to find more breast cancers, and several studies have shown it can be helpful in women with more dense breasts. A large study is now in progress to better compare outcomes between 3D mammograms and standard (2D) mammograms.
It should be noted that 3D mammograms often cost more than 2D mammograms, and this added cost may not be covered by insurance.
The American Cancer Society (ACS) breast cancer screening guidelines consider having had either a 2D or 3D mammogram as being in line with current screening recommendations. The ACS also believes that women should be able to choose between 2D and 3D mammography if they or their doctor believes one would be more appropriate, and that out-of-pocket costs should not be a barrier to having either one.
Clinical breast exam (CBE) and breast self-exam (BSE)
Research has not shown a clear benefit of regular physical breast exams done by either a health professional (clinical breast exams) or by women themselves (breast self-exams). There is very little evidence that these tests help find breast cancer early when women also get screening mammograms. Most often when breast cancer is detected because of symptoms (such as a lump in the breast), a woman discovers the symptom during usual activities such as bathing or dressing. Women should be familiar with how their breasts normally look and feel and should report any changes to a health care provider right away.
While the American Cancer Society does not recommend regular clinical breast exams or breast self-exams as part of a routine breast cancer screening schedule, this does not mean that these exams should never be done. In some situations, particularly for women at higher-than-average risk, for example, health care providers may still offer clinical breast exams, along with providing counseling about risk and early detection. And some women might still be more comfortable doing regular self-exams as a way to keep track of how their breasts look and feel. But it’s important to understand that there is very little evidence that doing these exams routinely is helpful for women at average risk of breast cancer.
American Cancer Society screening recommendations for women at high risk
Women who are at high risk for breast cancer based on certain factors should get a breast MRI and a mammogram every year, typically starting at age 30. This includes women who:

Have a lifetime risk of breast cancer of about 20% to 25% or greater, according to risk assessment tools that are based mainly on family history (see below)
Have a known BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutation (based on having had genetic testing)
Have a first-degree relative (parent, brother, sister, or child) with a BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutation, and have not had genetic testing themselves
Had radiation therapy to the chest before they were 30 years old
Have Li-Fraumeni syndrome, Cowden syndrome, or Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome, or have first-degree relatives with one of these syndromes

The American Cancer Society recommends against MRI screening for women whose lifetime risk of breast cancer is less than 15%.
There’s not enough evidence to make a recommendation for or against yearly MRI screening for women who have a higher lifetime risk based on certain factors, such as:

Having a personal history of breast cancer, ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS), atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH), or atypical lobular hyperplasia (ALH)
Having “extremely” or “heterogeneously” dense breasts as seen on a mammogram

If MRI is used, it should be in addition to, not instead of, a screening mammogram. This is because although an MRI is more likely to find cancer than a mammogram, it may still miss some cancers that a mammogram would find.
Most women at high risk should begin screening with MRI and mammograms when they are 30 and continue for as long as they are in good health. But this is a decision that should be made with a woman's health care providers, taking into account her personal circumstances and preferences.
Tools used to assess breast cancer risk
Several risk assessment tools can help health professionals estimate a woman’s breast cancer risk. These tools give rough estimates of breast cancer risk, based on different combinations of risk factors and different data sets.
Because each of these tools uses different factors to estimate risk, they might give different risk estimates for the same woman. A woman's risk estimates can also change over time.
Risk assessment tools that include family history in first-degree relatives (parents, siblings, and children) and second-degree relatives (such as aunts and grandparents) on both sides of the family should be used with the ACS guidelines to decide if a woman should have MRI screening. The use of any of the risk assessment tools and its results should be discussed by a woman with her health care provider.Breast ultrasound uses sound waves and their echoes to make computer pictures of the inside of the breast. It can show certain breast changes, like fluid-filled cysts, that can be harder to see on mammograms.
When is breast ultrasound used?
Ultrasound is not typically used as a routine screening test for breast cancer. But it can be useful for looking at some breast changes, such as lumps (especially those that can be felt but not seen on a mammogram). Ultrasound can be especially helpful in women with dense breast tissue, which can make it hard to see abnormal areas on mammograms. It also can be used to get a better look at a suspicious area that was seen on a mammogram.
Ultrasound is useful because it can often tell the difference between fluid-filled masses like cysts (which are very unlikely to be cancer) and solid masses (which might need further testing to be sure they're not cancer).
Ultrasound can also be used to help guide a biopsy needle into an area of the breast so that cells can be taken out and tested for cancer. This can also be done in swollen lymph nodes under the arm.
Ultrasound is widely available and is fairly easy to have done, and it does not expose a person to radiation. It also tends to cost less than other testing options.
How is a breast ultrasound done?
Most often, ultrasound is done using a handheld, wand-like instrument called a transducer. First a gel is put on the skin and/or the transducer, and then the transducer is moved around over the skin. It sends out sound waves and picks up the echoes as they bounce off body tissues deeper under the skin. These echoes are made into a picture on a computer screen. You might feel some pressure as the transducer is moved around on your skin, but it should not be painful.
Automated breast ultrasound (ABUS) is an option at some imaging centers. This technique uses a much larger transducer to take hundreds of images that cover nearly the entire breast. ABUS might sometimes be done as an added screening exam for women who have dense breasts. It might also be used in women who have abnormal findings on other imaging tests or who have breast symptoms. When ABUS is done, a second handheld ultrasound is often needed to get more pictures of any suspicious areas.
How are breast ultrasound results reported?
Doctors use the same standard system to describe results of mammograms, breast ultrasound, and breast MRI. This system (called the Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System or BI-RADS) sorts the results into categories numbered 0 through 6.
By sorting the results into these categories, doctors can describe what they find on an ultrasound using the same words and terms. This makes communicating about these test results and following up after the tests much easier.
For more details on﻿ the BI-RADS categories, see Understanding Your Mammogram Report.﻿ While the categories are the same for each of these imaging tests, the recommended next steps after these tests might be different.Breast MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) uses radio waves and strong magnets to make detailed pictures of the inside of the breast.
When is breast MRI used?
Breast MRI might be used in different situations.
To screen for breast cancer: For certain women at high risk for breast cancer, a screening breast MRI is recommended along with a yearly mammogram. MRI is not recommended as a screening test by itself, because it can miss some cancers that a mammogram would find.
Although MRI can find some cancers not seen on a mammogram, it’s also more likely to find things that turn out not to be cancer (called a false positive). This can result in some women getting tests and/or biopsies that end up not being needed. This is why MRI is not recommended as a screening test for women at average risk of breast cancer.
To look at the breasts if someone has symptoms that might be from breast cancer: Breast MRI might sometimes be done if breast cancer is suspected (based on symptoms or exam findings, such as suspicious nipple discharge). Other imaging tests such as mammograms and breast ultrasound are usually done first, but MRI might be done if the results of these tests aren’t clear.
To help determine the extent of breast cancer: If breast cancer has already been diagnosed, breast MRI is sometimes done to help determine the exact size and location of the cancer, to look for other tumors in the breast, and to check for tumors in the other breast. Breast MRI isn’t always helpful in this setting, so not every woman who has been diagnosed with breast cancer needs this test.
To check for silicone breast implant leaks: In women with silicone breast implants, breast MRI can be used to check for implant leaks. This isn’t used for women with saline breast implants.
What you need to know about getting a breast MRI
Just as mammograms are done using x-ray machines specially designed for the breasts, breast MRI also requires special equipment. This MRI machine has a special device called a dedicated breast coil to image the breasts. Not all hospitals and imaging centers have dedicated breast MRI equipment. If you are having a breast MRI, it’s important to have it at a facility that has dedicated equipment and can do an MRI-guided breast biopsy if needed, or a facility that partners with one that can.
MRI uses strong magnets instead of radiation to make very detailed, cross-sectional pictures of the body. An MRI scanner takes pictures from many angles, as if someone were looking at a slice of your body from the front, from the side, or from above your head. MRI creates pictures of soft tissue parts of the body that would sometimes be hard to see using other imaging tests.
Unlike mammograms or breast ultrasound, breast MRI requires that you have a contrast dye injected into your vein (through an IV line) before the pictures are taken. This helps make any abnormal areas in your breasts easier to see.
Tips for getting ready for the test
Check with your insurance provider before getting an MRI: Breast MRI can cost a lot, and it may need to be approved by your insurance company before the scan is done. Most private insurance plans that pay for mammogram screening also pay for MRI as a screening test if a woman is shown to be at high risk. It might help to go to a center with a breast health or high-risk clinic, where the staff has experience getting approval for breast MRIs.
Follow all instructions: You don’t usually need a special diet or preparation before an MRI, but follow any instructions you’re given.
If you have trouble with enclosed spaces: Breast MRI is most often done while you are lying on your belly with your arms above your head inside a long, narrow tube. If being in a tight space might be a problem for you, you might need to take medicine to help you relax while in the scanner. Talking with the technologist or a patient counselor or getting a tour of the MRI machine before the test can also help. You’ll be in the exam room alone during the test, but you can talk to the MR technologist, who can see and hear what’s going on.
Remove metal objects: Before the test, you'll be asked to undress and put on a gown or other clothes without zippers or metal. Be sure to remove any metal objects you can, like hair clips, jewelry, dental work, and body piercings.
If you have metal in your body: Before the scan, the technologist will ask you if you have any metal in your body. Some metallic objects will not cause problems, but others can.
Let your technologist know if you have any medical implants or clips in your body. If you have any of these types of medical implants, you should not even enter the MRI scanning area unless you're told it's OK to do so by a radiologist or technologist:

An implanted defibrillator or pacemaker
Clips used on a brain aneurysm
A cochlear (ear) implant
Metal coils inside blood vesselsThe most commonly used breast imaging tests at this time are mammograms, ultrasound, and breast MRI. Other tests, such as CT scans, bone scans, or PET scans might sometimes be done to help find out if breast cancer has spread.
Newer types of tests are now being developed for breast imaging. Some of these, such as breast tomosynthesis (3D mammography), are already being used in some centers. Other tests are still being studied, and it will take time to see if they are as good as or better than those used today.
Abbreviated breast MRI (fast breast MRI) 
This is a newer technique that is done with a standard breast MRI scanner. But fewer images are taken (over a shorter period of time) than with a standard breast MRI. As with standard breast MRI, a contrast material called gadolinium is given through an IV line before some of the images are taken. Abbreviated breast MRI is now being studied as a possible screening test for breast cancer, especially in women with dense breasts, to see if it provides the same information as a standard breast MRI.
Nuclear medicine tests (radionuclide imaging)
For these tests, a small amount of radioactive material (known as a tracer) is injected into the blood. The tracer is more likely to collect in cancer cells. A special camera can then be used to see the tracer in the breast (or other parts of the body).
For molecular breast imaging (MBI), also known as scintimammography or breast-specific gamma imaging (BSGI), a tracer called technetium-99m sestamibi is injected into the blood, and a special camera is then used to see the tracer while the breast is gently compressed. This test is being studied mainly as a way to follow up breast problems (such as a lump or an abnormal mammogram), or to help determine the extent of breast cancer that has already been diagnosed. It’s also being studied as a screening test for use along with mammograms to look for cancer in women with dense breasts. One potential drawback is that it exposes the whole body to radiation, so it’s unlikely this test would be used for screening every year.
For a positron emission tomography (PET) scan, a different type of radioactive tracer is injected into the blood. Standard PET scans, which use a form of radioactive sugar (known as FDG), are sometimes done if there's a concern that breast cancer might have spread to other parts of the body. A newer type of tracer, known as fluoroestradiol F-18, is now available to look for the spread of some advanced estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancers. 
Positron emission mammography (PEM) is a newer imaging test of the breast that combines some aspects of a PET scan and a mammogram. PEM uses the same type of radioactive tracer injected into the blood as a PET scan. The breast is then lightly compressed while the images are taken, as with a mammogram. PEM may be better able to detect small clusters of cancer cells within the breast than standard mammography. This is because it takes into account how active the breast cells are, as opposed to just their structure. PEM is being studied mainly in women with breast cancer to see if it can help determine the extent of the cancer. PEM exposes the whole body to radiation, so it isn't likely to be used every year for breast cancer screening.
Contrast-enhanced mammography (CEM)
Also known as contrast-enhanced spectral mammography (CESM), this is a newer test in which a contrast dye containing iodine is injected into the blood a few minutes before two sets of mammograms (using different energy levels) are taken. The contrast can help the x-rays show any abnormal areas in the breasts. This test can be used to get a better look at areas that appear abnormal on a standard mammogram, or to help assess the extent of a tumor in women just diagnosed with breast cancer. Studies are now comparing it to breast MRI in these settings (where it might be particularly useful if MRI can't be done for some reason), as well as possibly for use in screening women with dense breasts. If it proves to be as good as MRI, CEM could become more widely used because it is quicker to do and is less expensive than MRI.
Elastography
This is a test that can be done as part of an ultrasound exam. It’s based on the idea that breast cancer tumors tend to be firmer and stiffer than the surrounding breast tissue. For this technique, the breast is compressed slightly, and the ultrasound can show how firm a suspicious area is. This test might prove to be useful in telling if the area is more likely to be cancer or a benign (non-cancerous) tumor. 
Optical imaging tests
These tests pass light into the breast and then measure the light that returns or passes through the tissue. The technique does not use radiation and does not require breast compression. Early studies going on now are looking at combining optical imaging with other tests like MRI, ultrasound, or 3D mammography to help look for breast cancer.
Electrical impedance tomography (EIT) 
EIT﻿ is based on the idea that breast cancer cells conduct electricity differently from normal cells. For this test, small electrodes are taped to the skin to pass very small electrical currents through the breast and then detect them on the skin. EIT does not use radiation or compress the breasts. This test might prove to be useful in helping to classify tumors found on mammograms. But so far there hasn’t been enough clinical testing to show if it's useful for breast cancer screening.Knowing how your breasts normally look and feel is an important part of your breast health. Although having regular screening tests for breast cancer is important, mammograms do not find every breast cancer. This means it's also important for you to know what your breasts normally look and feel like, so you’ll be aware of any changes in your breasts.
The most common symptom of breast cancer is a new lump or mass (although most breast lumps are not cancer). A painless, hard mass that has irregular edges is more likely to be cancer, but breast cancers can be also soft, round, tender, or even painful.
Other possible symptoms of breast cancer include:

Swelling of all or part of a breast (even if no lump is felt)
Skin dimpling (sometimes looking like an orange peel)
Breast or nipple pain
Nipple retraction (turning inward)
Nipple or breast skin that is red, dry, flaking, or thickened
Nipple discharge (other than breast milk)
Swollen lymph nodes under the arm or near the collar bone (Sometimes this can be a sign of breast cancer spread even before the original tumor in the breast is large enough to be felt.)

Many of these symptoms can also be caused by benign (non-cancerous) breast conditions. Still, it’s important to have any new breast mass, lump, or other change checked by an experienced health care professional so the cause can be found and treated, if needed.
Remember that knowing what to look for does not take the place of having regular screening for breast cancer. Screening mammography can often help find breast cancer early, before any symptoms appear. Finding breast cancer early gives you a better chance of successful treatment.If breast symptoms or the results of an imaging test (such as a mammogram) suggest you might have breast cancer, you may need a breast biopsy.
What is a breast biopsy?
A biopsy of the breast is a procedure done to remove a piece of breast tissue or tumor, called a sample. During a biopsy, a doctor takes samples from the suspicious area so they can be looked at in the lab to see if they contain cancer cells.
Needing a breast biopsy doesn’t necessarily mean you have cancer. Most biopsy results are not cancer, but a biopsy is the only way to find out for sure.Breast cancer during pregnancy isn't common. But if you find a lump or notice any changes in your breasts that concern you, tell your doctor or nurse right away. There are a variety of tests a pregnant woman can have if breast cancer is suspected. And there are options for treating breast cancer if you are pregnant.
If you are pregnant and breast cancer is found, it may be called gestational breast cancer or pregnancy-associated breast cancer (PABC).
How common is breast cancer during pregnancy?
Breast cancer is found in about 1 in every 3,000 pregnant women. It is the most common type of cancer found during pregnancy.   
Breast cancers can be harder to find when you’re pregnant
Changes in hormone levels during pregnancy cause the breasts to change. The breasts may become larger, lumpy, and/or tender. This can make it harder for you or your doctor to notice a lump caused by cancer until it gets quite large.
Another reason it may be hard to find breast cancers early during pregnancy is that many women put off breast cancer screening with mammograms until after the pregnancy. Even when women do get mammograms, pregnancy and breastfeeding can make breast tissue denser, which can make it harder to see an early cancer on a mammogram.
Because of these challenges, when a pregnant woman develops breast cancer, it’s often diagnosed at a later stage than it usually is in women who are not pregnant. For example, it’s more likely to have already spread to lymph nodes.
What to look for
If you find a lump or other changes in your breasts that concern you, don’t ignore them. Tell your doctor or nurse right away. Any suspicious breast changes should be checked out or even biopsied (see below) before assuming they are a normal response to pregnancy.
Along with a clinical breast exam, several types of imaging tests can be used to look for breast abnormalities, if needed. Typically a breast ultrasound and/or mammogram can be done. A breast biopsy (removing a piece of the abnormal area to check it for cancer cells) is often another option, especially if imaging tests show a suspicious finding. (See below.)
Are mammograms and other imaging tests safe during pregnancy?
A main concern with any imaging test during pregnancy is whether it exposes the developing fetus to radiation, which could be harmful, especially during the first trimester.
Mammograms can find most breast cancers that start when a woman is pregnant, and it’s generally thought to be safe to have a mammogram during pregnancy. The amount of radiation needed for a mammogram is small, and the radiation is focused on the breasts, so most of it doesn’t reach other parts of the body. For extra protection, a lead shield is placed over the lower part of the belly to help keep radiation from reaching the womb. Still, small amounts of radiation might reach the fetus, and scientists can’t be certain about the effects of even a very small dose of radiation on an unborn baby.
Ultrasound exams of the breast do not use radiation and are thought to be safe during pregnancy. This is typically an easy test to have, so it’s often the first test used to evaluate a change in the breast (such as a lump) during pregnancy.
Other tests, such as PET scans, bone scans, and computed tomography (CT) scans are more likely to expose the fetus to radiation (see below).
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) does not use radiation. However, breast MRIs typically require that a contrast material called gadolinium is injected into the blood in order to get useful images. This contrast can cross the placenta (the organ that connects the mother to the fetus) and has been linked with fetal abnormalities in lab animals. Because of this, doctors typically don’t recommend breast MRI during pregnancy.
Breast biopsy during pregnancy
If a new breast lump or abnormal imaging test result raises concerns about a breast change possibly being cancer, a biopsy is typically done. During a biopsy, small pieces of breast tissue are taken from the area of concern.
The most common breast biopsy technique is a core needle biopsy, which uses a hollow needle to remove the pieces of breast tissue. This is  usually done as an outpatient procedure, even if you’re pregnant. Most often, numbing medicine (local anesthesia) is used to numb just the area of the breast where the biopsy will be done. This causes little risk to the fetus.
If a core needle biopsy doesn’t give a clear answer, a surgical biopsy is typically the next step. For this type of biopsy, a larger piece of breast tissue is removed through a small cut (incision) in the breast. Surgical biopsies are often done under general anesthesia (where you are given medicine to put you into a deep sleep), which carries a small risk to the fetus.
Imaging tests to stage breast cancer
If breast cancer is found, you might need other tests to find out if cancer cells have spread within the breast or to other parts of the body. This process is called staging. Different staging tests may be needed, depending on your situation.
As noted above, ultrasound scans do not use radiation and are safe during pregnancy.
Chest x-rays are sometimes needed to help make treatment decisions. They use a small amount of radiation to create the images. They’re generally thought to be safe to have when you’re pregnant, as long as your belly is shielded.
Other tests, such as PET scans, bone scans, and computed tomography (CT) scans are more likely to expose the fetus to radiation. These tests are not often needed to stage breast cancer, especially if the cancer is thought to be just in the breast. If one of these tests is needed, doctors might be able to make adjustments to limit the amount of radiation exposure to the fetus.
Treating the cancer
The treatment of breast cancer in pregnant women is typically similar to that used for non-pregnant women, especially for early-stage disease, although some adjustments might be needed to help protect the fetus. Learn more in Treating Breast Cancer During Pregnancy.
Can breast cancer spread to the baby?
Breast cancer has never been found to spread from the mother to the fetus. But in a few rare cases, the cancer has reached the placenta (the organ that connects the mother to the fetus). This could affect the amount of nutrition the fetus gets from the mother.
For answers to some common questions about pregnancy after having had breast cancer, see Pregnancy After Breast Cancer.Knowing a breast cancer’s grade is important to understand how fast it’s likely to grow and spread.
What is a breast cancer’s grade?
Cancer cells are given a grade when they are removed from the breast and checked in the lab. The grade is based on how much the cancer cells look like normal cells. The grade is used to help predict your outcome (prognosis) and to help figure out what treatments might work best.
A low grade number (grade 1) usually means the cancer is slower-growing and less likely to spread.
A high grade number (grade 3) means a faster-growing cancer that’s more likely to spread.
An intermediate grade number (grade 2) means the cancer is growing faster than a grade 1 cancer but slower than a grade 3 cancer.
Grading invasive breast cancer cells
Three features of the invasive breast cancer cell are studied and each is given a score. The scores are then added to get a number between 3 and 9 that is used to get a grade of 1, 2, or 3, which is noted on your pathology report. Sometimes the terms well differentiated, moderately differentiated, and poorly differentiated are used to describe the grade instead of numbers:

Grade 1 or well differentiated (score 3, 4, or 5). The cells are slower-growing, and look more like normal breast cells.
Grade 2 or moderately differentiated (score 6, 7). The cells are growing at a speed of and look like cells somewhere between grades 1 and 3.
Grade 3 or poorly differentiated (score 8, 9). The cancer cells look very different from normal cells and will probably grow and spread faster.

Our information about pathology reports can help you understand details about your breast cancer.   
Grading ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS)
DCIS is also graded on how abnormal the cancer cells look and has a similar grading system to that used for invasive breast cancer (see above).

Grade 1 or low grade DCIS. The cells are growing slower, and look more like normal breast cells. These cells tend to have estrogen and progesterone receptors (ER-positive and PR-positive). 
Grade 2 or intermediate grade. The cells are growing at a speed of and look like cells somewhere between grades 1 and 3.
Grade 3 or high grade. The cancer cells look very different from normal cells and are growing faster. These cells tend not to have estrogen and progesterone receptors (ER-negative and PR-negative). High grade DCIS is often more likely to turn into invasive breast cancer.

Necrosis (areas of dead or dying cancer cells) is also noted. If there is necrosis, it means the tumor is growing quickly. The term comedo necrosis may be used if a breast duct is filled with dead and dying cells. Comedo necrosis is often linked to a high grade of DCIS and has a higher chance of developing into invasive breast cancer.
See Understanding Your Pathology Report: Ductal Carcinoma In Situ for more on how DCIS is described.Finding out more information about the DNA in the breast cancer cells can help predict how fast the cancer cells are dividing and growing.
What is ploidy and what does it mean?
The ploidy of cancer cells refers to the amount of DNA they contain.

If there's a normal amount of DNA in the cells, they are said to be diploid. These cancers tend to grow and spread more slowly.
If the amount of DNA is abnormal, then the cells are called aneuploid. These cancers tend to be more aggressive. They also tend to grow and spread faster.

Tests of ploidy may help figure out long-term outcomes, but they rarely change treatment and are considered optional. They are not usually recommended as part of a routine breast cancer work-up.
What is cell proliferation?
Cell proliferation is how quickly a cancer cell copies its DNA and divides into 2 cells. If the cancer cells are dividing more rapidly, it means the cancer is faster growing or more aggressive.
The rate of cancer cell proliferation can be estimated by doing a Ki-67 test. In some cases, Ki-67 testing to measure cell proliferation may be used to help plan treatment or estimate treatment outcomes. But test results can vary depending on things like the lab doing the testing, the testing method, and what part of the tumor is tested. 
Another way to determine cell division is the S-phase fraction, which is the percentage of cells in a sample that are copying their DNA as it gets ready to divide into 2 new cells.
If the S-phase fraction or Ki-67 labeling index is high, it means that the cancer cells are dividing more rapidly.Breast cancer cells taken out during a biopsy or surgery will be tested to see if they have certain proteins that are estrogen or progesterone receptors. When the hormones estrogen and progesterone attach to these receptors, they stimulate the cancer to grow. Cancers are called hormone receptor-positive or hormone receptor-negative based on whether or not they have these receptors (proteins). Knowing the hormone receptor status is important in deciding treatment options. Ask your doctor about your hormone receptor status and what it means for you.
What are estrogen and progesterone receptors?
Receptors are proteins in or on cells that can attach to certain substances in the blood. Normal breast cells and some breast cancer cells have receptors that attach to the hormones estrogen and progesterone, and need these hormones for the cells to grow.
Breast cancer cells may have one, both, or none of these receptors.

ER-positive: Breast cancers that have estrogen receptors are called ER-positive (or ER+) cancers.
PR-positive: Breast cancers with progesterone receptors are called PR-positive (or PR+) cancers.
Hormone receptor-positive: If the cancer cell has one or both of the receptors above, the term hormone-receptive positive (also called hormone-positive or HR+) breast cancer may be used.
Hormone receptor-negative: If the cancer cell does not have the estrogen or the progesterone receptor, it's called hormone-receptor negative (also called hormone-negative or HR-).

Keeping the hormones estrogen and progesterone from attaching to the receptors can help keep the cancer from growing and spreading. There are drugs that can be used to do this.
Why is knowing hormone receptor status important?
Knowing the hormone receptor status of your cancer helps doctors decide how to treat it. If your cancer has one or both of these hormone receptors, hormone therapy drugs can be used to either lower estrogen levels or stop estrogen from acting on breast cancer cells. This kind of treatment is helpful for hormone receptor-positive breast cancers, but it doesn’t work on tumors that are hormone receptor-negative (both ER- and PR-negative).
All invasive breast cancers should be tested for both of these hormone receptors either on the biopsy sample or when the tumor is removed with surgery. About 3 of 4 breast cancers have at least one of these receptors. This percentage is higher in older women than in younger women. DCIS should also be checked for hormone receptors.
How are breast tumors tested for hormone receptors?
A test called an immunohistochemistry (IHC) test is used most often to find out if cancer cells have estrogen and progesterone receptors. The test results will help guide you and your cancer care team in making the best treatment decisions.
What do the hormone receptor test results mean?
Test results will give you your hormone receptor status. It will say a tumor is hormone receptor-positive if at least 1% of the cells tested have estrogen and/or progesterone receptors. Otherwise, the test will say the tumor is hormone receptor-negative.
Hormone receptor-positive (or hormone-positive) breast cancer cells have either estrogen (ER) or progesterone (PR) receptors or both. These breast cancers can be treated with hormone therapy drugs that lower estrogen levels or block estrogen receptors. Hormone receptor-positive cancers tend to grow more slowly than those that are hormone receptor-negative. Women with hormone receptor-positive cancers tend to have a better outlook in the short-term, but these cancers can sometimes come back many years after treatment.
Hormone receptor-negative (or hormone-negative) breast cancers have no estrogen or progesterone receptors. Treatment with hormone therapy drugs is not helpful for these cancers. These cancers tend to grow faster than hormone receptor-positive cancers. If they come back after treatment, it’s often in the first few years. Hormone receptor-negative cancers are more common in women who have not yet gone through menopause.
Triple-negative breast cancer cells don’t have estrogen or progesterone receptors and also don’t make any or too much of the protein called HER2. These cancers tend to be more common in women younger than 40 years of age, who are Black, or who have a mutation in the BRCA1 gene. Triple-negative breast cancers grow and spread faster than most other types of breast cancer. Because the cancer cells don’t have hormone receptors, hormone therapy is not helpful in treating these cancers. And because they don’t have too much HER2, drugs that target HER2 aren’t helpful, either. Chemotherapy can still be useful. See Triple-negative Breast Cancer to learn more.
Triple-positive cancers are ER-positive, PR-positive, and HER2-positive. These cancers can be treated with hormone drugs as well as drugs that target HER2.About 15% to 20% of breast tumors have higher levels of a protein known as HER2. These cancers are called HER2-positive breast cancers. Ask your doctor about your HER2 status and what it means for you.
What is HER2 and what does it mean?
HER2 is a protein that helps breast cancer cells grow quickly. Breast cancer cells with higher than normal levels of HER2 are called HER2-positive. These cancers tend to grow and spread faster than breast cancers that are HER2-negative, but are much more likely to respond to treatment with drugs that target the HER2 protein.
All invasive breast cancers should be tested for HER2 either on the biopsy sample or when the tumor is removed with surgery.
How are breast tumors tested for HER2?
Either a test called an immunohistochemistry (IHC) test or fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) test is used to find out if cancer cells have a high level of the HER2 protein. 
See Testing Biopsy and Cytology Specimens for Cancer and Understanding Your Pathology Report: Breast Cancer to get more details about these tests.  
What do the test results mean?
The results of HER2 testing will guide you and your cancer care team in making the best treatment decisions.
It is not clear if one test is more accurate than the other, but FISH is more expensive and takes longer to get the results. Often the IHC test is done first.

If the IHC result is 0, the cancer is considered HER2-negative. These cancers do not respond to treatment with drugs that target HER2.
If the IHC result is 1+, the cancer is considered HER2-negative. These cancers do not usually respond to treatment with drugs that target HER2, but new research shows that certain HER2 drugs might help in some cases (see below).
If the IHC result is 2+, the HER2 status of the tumor is not clear and is called "equivocal." This means that the HER2 status needs to be tested with FISH to clarify the result.
If the IHC result is 3+, the cancer is HER2-positive. These cancers are usually treated with drugs that target HER2.

Some breast cancers that have an IHC result of 1+ or an IHC result of 2+ along with a negative FISH test might be called HER2-low cancers. These breast cancers are still being studied but appear to benefit from certain HER2-targeted drugs.  
Triple-negative breast tumors don’t have too much HER2 and also don’t have estrogen or progesterone receptors. They are HER2-, ER-, and PR-negative. Hormone therapy and drugs that target HER2 are not helpful in treating these cancers. See Triple-negative Breast Cancer to learn more.
Triple-positive breast tumors  are HER2-positive, ER-positive, and PR-positive. These cancers are treated with hormone drugs as well as drugs that target HER2.Gene expression tests are a form of personalized medicine - a way to learn more about your cancer and tailor your treatment.
These tests are done on breast cancer cells after surgery or biopsy to look at the patterns of a number of different genes. This process or test is sometimes called gene expression profiling.
What do the test results mean?
The patterns found can help predict if certain early-stage breast cancers are likely to come back after initial treatment.
Some gene expression testing/profiling can help predict which women will most likely benefit from chemotherapy after breast surgery (adjuvant chemotherapy.) Hormone therapy is a standard treatment for hormone receptor-positive breast cancers, but it’s not always clear when to use chemotherapy. These tests can help guide that decision. Still, these tests cannot tell any one woman for certain if her cancer will come back with or without chemotherapy.
These tests continue to be studied in large clinical trials to better understand how and when to best use them. In the meantime, ask your doctor if these tests might be useful for you. 
Testing options
The Oncotype DX, MammaPrint, and Prosigna are examples of tests that look at different sets of breast cancer genes to see if chemotherapy is needed to help reduce the risk of cancer coming back (recurrence). More tests are in development. The type of test that's used will depend on your situation. Keep in mind that these tests are used for early-stage cancers, and testing isn’t needed in all cases. For example, if breast cancer is advanced, it might be clear that chemotherapy is needed, even without gene expression testing.
Oncotype DX
The Oncotype DX test is used for stage I, II or IIIa hormone receptor-positive tumors that have not spread to more than 3 lymph nodes and are HER2 negative. It can also be used for DCIS (ductal carcinoma in situ or stage 0 breast cancer).
This test looks at a set of 21 genes in cancer cells from tumor biopsy or surgery samples to get a “recurrence score,” which is a number between 0 and 100. The score reflects the risk of the breast cancer coming back (recurring) in the next 9 years if you are treated with hormone therapy alone and how likely you are to benefit from getting chemo after surgery.
For women who are older than 50 years and have no lymph nodes with cancer:

A low score (0-25) means a low risk of recurrence. Most women with low-recurrence scores do not benefit from chemotherapy and have good outcomes when treated with hormone therapy.
A high score (26-100) means a higher risk of recurrence. Women with high-recurrence scores are more likely to benefit from the addition of chemotherapy to hormone therapy to help lower the chance of the cancer coming back.

For women age 50 or younger and have no lymph nodes with cancer:

A low score (0-15) means a low risk of recurrence. Most of these women with low-recurrence scores do not benefit from chemotherapy and have good outcomes when treated with hormone therapy.
An intermediate score (16-25) means that some women in this group might have a small benefit from adding chemotherapy to hormone therapy to lower the risk of the cancer coming back. Talk to your doctor about options.
A high score (26-100) means a higher risk of recurrence. Women with high-recurrence scores are more likely to benefit from the addition of chemotherapy to hormone therapy to help lower the chance of the cancer coming back.

For women age 50 or younger that have cancer in the lymph nodes:

A low score (0-25) means a lower risk of recurrence, but women in this group might have a benefit from adding chemotherapy to hormone therapy. Another option might be ovarian suppression along with tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor. 
A high score (26-100) means a higher risk of recurrence. Women in this group are more likely to benefit from the addition of chemotherapy to hormone therapy to help lower the chance of the cancer coming back.

MammaPrint
The MammaPrint test can be used to help determine how likely breast cancers are to recur in a distant part of the body after treatment. It can be used for any type of invasive breast cancer that’s 5cm (about 2 inches) or smaller and has spread to no more than 3 lymph nodes. This test can be done regardless of a woman's age or the cancer's hormone or HER2 status.
The test looks at 70 different genes to determine if the cancer is at low risk or high risk of coming back (recurring) in the next 10 years. The test results come back as either “low risk” or “high risk.” This test is also being studied as a way to determine whether certain women might benefit from chemotherapy. 
Prosigna
The Prosigna test can be used to predict the risk of recurrence in the next 10 years in women who have gone through menopause (postmenopausal) and whose invasive breast cancers are hormone receptor-positive and HER2-negative. It can be used to test early-stage cancers that have not spread to the lymph nodes, or early-stage cancers with no more than 3 positive lymph nodes.
The test looks at 50 genes and classifies the results as low, intermediate, or high risk.  
Breast Cancer Index
The Breast Cancer Index test is done on your tumor sample from when you are first diagnosed. It can be used to predict the risk of recurrence in the 5 to 10 years after diagnosis in women whose invasive breast cancers are hormone receptor-positive and have not spread to nearby lymph nodes or have not spread to more than 3 lymph nodes. It can also help predict who might benefit from hormone therapy for longer than 5 years.
The test looks at 11 genes and classifies the results as low or high risk.When breast cancer is diagnosed, samples that have been collected during biopsies, bloodwork, or other tests are sent to a pathology lab. A pathologist, a doctor who uses lab tests to diagnose diseases such as cancer, will look at the samples and may do other special tests to help better classify the cancer. These tests can also help choose certain drugs that might work better for your cancer. This is sometimes called precision or personalized medicine because it is precise (or specific) for the features of your cancer.
The results of these tests are described in a pathology report, which is usually available within a week or two. If you have any questions about your pathology results or any diagnostic tests, talk to your doctor. If needed, you can get a second opinion of your pathology report by having your tissue samples sent to a pathologist at another lab.
Tests for certain proteins on tumor cells
Lab tests might be done to look for certain proteins on the cancer cells.
Hormone receptor proteins: All breast cancers are tested for hormone receptors (proteins). Specifically, the cancer is tested for estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR). Read more at Breast Cancer Hormone Receptor Status.
HER2 protein: All invasive breast cancers are tested for the HER2 protein to see if too much is being made. If it is not clear how much HER2 protein is present, molecular testing might be done to see how many copies of the HER2 gene the cancer cells have. For more information about the HER2 gene and protein see Breast Cancer HER2 Status.
PD-L1 protein: People with advanced or metastatic triple-negative breast cancer might have their cancer tissue tested for the PD-L1 protein, which can show if the cancer is more likely to respond to treatment with certain immunotherapy drugs along with chemotherapy. 
Molecular tests for gene changes
In some cases, doctors may test for specific gene changes in the breast cancer cells that could mean certain targeted drugs or immunotherapy drugs might help treat the cancer.
These molecular tests (also known as genomic tests or biomarker tests) can be done on tissue taken during a biopsy or surgery for breast cancer. If the biopsy sample is too small and all the molecular tests cannot be done, the testing may also be done on blood that is taken from a vein just like a regular blood draw. This blood contains the DNA from dead tumor cells (known as circulating tumor DNA, or ctDNA). Obtaining the tumor DNA through a blood draw is sometimes called a "liquid biopsy" and can have advantages over a standard needle biopsy, which can carry risks.
Some changes that might be tested for include:

BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene mutations: For women with an advanced HER2-negative breast cancer, your doctor might test you (not your cancer cells) for a hereditary BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation (gene change). If you have one of these gene changes, treatment with the targeted drugs, olaparib (Lynparza) or talazoparib (Talzenna) might be options.
PIK3CA, AKT1, and PTEN gene mutations: These 3 genes code for proteins in the same signaling pathway inside cells that can help them grow. Cancer cells sometimes have changes in one of these genes. If you have advanced breast cancer that is hormone receptor-positive and HER2-negative, and if the cancer cells show changes in one of these genes, a targeted drug such as capivasertib (Truqap) or alpelisib (Piqray) might be an option, along with the hormone drug fulvestrant.
ESR1 gene mutations: The ESR1 gene contains the cell’s instructions for the estrogen receptor (ER) protein. Mutations in this gene can make breast cancers less likely to be helped by some forms of hormone therapy. But for advanced breast cancer, the hormone drug elacestrant (Orserdu) may be helpful if the cancer cells have an ESR1 mutation. This gene change can be tested for in a sample of your blood.
MSI and MMR testing: Breast cancer cells might be tested to see if they show high levels of gene changes called microsatellite instability (MSI). Testing might also be done to see if the cancer cells have changes in any of the mismatch repair (MMR) genes (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2). Breast cancer cells that have a high level of microsatellite instability (MSI-H) or a defect in a mismatch repair gene (dMMR) might be treated with the immunotherapy drugs, pembrolizumab (Keytruda) or dostarlizumab (Jemperli). 
Tumor mutational burden (TMB): TMB is a measure of the number of gene mutations (changes) inside the cancer cells. Breast cancer cells that have many gene mutations (a high TMB) might be more likely to be recognized as abnormal and attacked by the body’s immune system. If your breast cancer tissue is tested and found to have a high TMB (TMB-H), treatment with pembrolizumab (Keytruda) might be an option.
NTRK gene changes: Some breast cancer cells might have changes in one of the NTRK genes. These gene changes can sometimes lead to cancer growth. Larotrectinib (Vitrakvi) and entrectinib (Rozlytrek) are drugs that target the proteins made by the abnormal NTRK genes and might be options for people with advanced breast cancer.

Blood tests
Blood tests are not used to diagnose breast cancer, but they can help to get a sense of a person’s overall health. For example, they can be used to help determine if a person is healthy enough to have surgery or certain types of chemotherapy.
A complete blood count (CBC) looks at whether your blood has normal numbers of different types of blood cells. For example, it can show if you are anemic (have a low number of red blood cells), if you could have trouble with bleeding (due to a low number of blood platelets), or if you are at increased risk for infections (because of a low number of white blood cells). This test could be repeated regularly during treatment, as many cancer drugs can affect blood-forming cells of the bone marrow.
Blood chemistry tests can help find if some of your organs, such as the liver or kidneys are not working as well. For example, if cancer has spread to the bones, it might cause higher than normal levels of calcium and alkaline phosphatase. If breast cancer spreads to the liver, it can sometimes cause high levels of liver function tests, such as aspartate aminotransferase (AST) or alanine aminotransferase (ALT). Breast cancer does not spread to the kidneys, but if your bloodwork shows your kidneys are not working well, certain chemo drugs, like cisplatin, might not be used.
Breast cancer cells sometimes make substances called tumor markers that can be found in the blood. For breast cancer that has spread to other organs, tumor markers that might be checked include carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), cancer antigen 15-3 (CA 15-3), and cancer antigen 27-29 (CA 27-29). Blood tests for these tumor markers are not used by themselves to diagnose or follow breast cancer.﻿If you have been diagnosed with breast cancer, you might need more imaging tests. Your doctor will talk with you about which of these tests you may need.
Imaging tests use x-rays, magnetic fields, sound waves, or radioactive substances to create pictures of the inside of your body. Imaging tests might be done for a number of reasons including:

To look at suspicious areas that might be cancer
To learn how far cancer might have spread
To help determine if treatment is working
To look for possible signs of cancer coming back after treatment

Chest x-ray
A chest x-ray may be done to see if the cancer has spread to your lungs.
Computed tomography (CT) scan
A CT scan uses x-rays to make detailed cross-sectional images of your body. Instead of taking 1 or 2 pictures, like a regular x-ray, a CT scanner takes many pictures and a computer then combines them to show a slice of the part of your body being studied. This test is most often used to look at the chest and/or belly (abdomen) to see if breast cancer has spread to other organs, like the lungs or liver.
CT-guided needle biopsy: If a suspected area of cancer is deep within your body, a CT scan might be used to guide a biopsy needle into this area to get a tissue sample to check for cancer.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan
Like CT scans, MRI scans show detailed images of soft tissues in the body. But MRI scans use radio waves and strong magnets instead of x-rays. This test can be used to look at the breasts or other parts of the body, such as the brain or spinal cord to look for possible cancer spread.
Ultrasound
Ultrasound (ultrasonography) uses sound waves to create an image on a video screen. A small microphone-like instrument called a transducer that gives off sound waves is moved over the skin surface and picks up the echoes as they bounce off tissues. A computer turns these echoes into an image on the screen. An ultrasound can be done over a breast or in the underarm area, or even the liver.
Positron emission tomography (PET) scan
For a PET scan, a slightly radioactive form of sugar (known as FDG) is injected into the blood and collects mainly in cancer cells.
PET/CT scan: Often a PET scan is combined with a CT scan using a special machine that can do both at the same time. This lets the doctor compare areas of higher radioactivity on the PET scan with a more detailed picture on the CT scan.
Bone scan
A bone scan can help show if the cancer has spread to your bones. A small amount of low-level radioactive material is injected into the blood and collects mainly in abnormal areas of bone. It can show all of the bones of your body at the same time and can find small areas of cancer spread not seen on plain x-ray.After someone is diagnosed with breast cancer, doctors will try to figure out if it has spread, and if so, how far. This process is called staging. The stage of a cancer describes how much cancer is in the body. It helps determine how serious the cancer is and how best to treat it. Doctors also use a cancer's stage when talking about survival statistics.
The earliest stage breast cancers are stage 0 (carcinoma in situ). It then ranges from stage I (1) through IV (4). As a rule, the lower the number, the less the cancer has spread. A higher number, such as stage IV, means cancer has spread more. And within a stage, an earlier letter means a lower stage. Although each person’s cancer experience is unique, cancers with similar stages tend to have a similar outlook and are often treated in much the same way.
How is the stage determined?
The staging system most often used for breast cancer is the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) TNM system. The most recent AJCC system, effective January 2018, has both clinical and pathologic staging systems for breast cancer:

The pathologic stage (also called the surgical stage) is determined by examining tissue removed during an operation.
Sometimes, if surgery is not possible right away or at all, the cancer will be given a clinical stage instead. This is based on the results of a physical exam, biopsy, and imaging tests. The clinical stage is used to help plan treatment. Sometimes, though, the cancer has spread further than the clinical stage estimates, and may not predict the patient’s outlook as accurately as a pathologic stage.

In both staging systems, 7 key pieces of information are used:

The extent (size) of the tumor (T): How large is the cancer?  Has it grown into nearby areas?
The spread to nearby lymph nodes (N): Has the cancer spread to nearby lymph nodes? If so, how many?
The spread (metastasis) to distant sites (M): Has the cancer spread to distant organs such as the lungs or liver?
Estrogen Receptor (ER) status: Does the cancer have the protein called an estrogen receptor?
Progesterone Receptor (PR) status: Does the cancer have the protein called a progesterone receptor?
HER2 status: Does the cancer make too much of a protein called HER2?
Grade of the cancer (G): How much do the cancer cells look like normal cells?

In addition, Oncotype Dx® Recurrence Score results may also be considered in the stage in certain situations.
Once all of these factors have been determined, this information is combined in a process called stage grouping to assign an overall stage. For more information see Cancer Staging.
Details about the first three factors (the TNM categories) are below. However, the addition of information about ER, PR, and HER2 status along with grade has made stage grouping for breast cancer more complex than for other cancers. Because of this, it is best to ask your doctor about your specific stage and what it means.Survival rates can give you an idea of what percentage of people with the same type and stage of cancer are still alive a certain amount of time (usually 5 years) after they were diagnosed. They can’t tell you how long you will live, but they may help give you a better understanding of how likely it is that your treatment will be successful.
Keep in mind that survival rates are estimates and are often based on previous outcomes of large numbers of people who had a specific cancer, but they can’t predict what will happen in any particular person’s case. These statistics can be confusing and may lead you to have more questions. Talk with your doctor, who is familiar with your situation, about how these numbers may apply to you. 
What is a 5-year relative survival rate?
A relative survival rate compares women with the same type and stage of breast cancer to women in the overall population. For example, if the 5-year relative survival rate for a specific stage of breast cancer is 90%, it means that women who have that cancer are, on average, about 90% as likely as women who don’t have that cancer to live for at least 5 years after being diagnosed.
Where do these numbers come from?
The American Cancer Society relies on information from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database, maintained by the National Cancer Institute (NCI), to provide survival statistics for different types of cancer.
The SEER database tracks 5-year relative survival rates for breast cancer in the United States, based on how far the cancer has spread. The SEER database, however, does not group cancers by AJCC TNM stages (stage 1, stage 2, stage 3, etc.). Instead, it groups cancers into localized, regional, and distant stages:

Localized: There is no sign that the cancer has spread outside of the breast.
Regional: The cancer has spread outside the breast to nearby structures or lymph nodes.
Distant: The cancer has spread to distant parts of the body such as the lungs, liver or bones.

5-year relative survival rates for breast cancer
These numbers are based on women diagnosed with breast cancer between 2013 and 2019.



SEER Stage
5-year Relative Survival Rate


Localized*
99%


Regional
86%


Distant
31%


All SEER stages combined
91%



*Localized stage only includes invasive cancer. It does not include ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS).
Understanding the numbers

Women now being diagnosed with breast cancer may have a better outlook than these numbers show. Treatments improve over time, and these numbers are based on women who were diagnosed and treated at least five years earlier.
These numbers apply only to the stage of the cancer when it is first diagnosed. They do not apply later on if the cancer grows, spreads, or comes back after treatment.
These numbers don’t take everything into account. Survival rates are grouped based on how far the cancer has spread, but your age, overall health, how well the cancer responds to treatment, tumor grade, the presence of hormone receptors on the cancer cells, HER2 status, and other factors can also affect your outlook.
Survival rates for women with triple-negative breast cancer are different than those above. See Triple-negative Breast Cancer.
Survival rates for women with inflammatory breast cancer are different than those above. See Inflammatory Breast Cancer.It’s important to be able to have frank, open discussions with your cancer care team. They want to answer all of your questions so that you can make informed treatment and life decisions.
Here are some questions that you can use to help better understand your cancer and your treatment options. Don’t be afraid to take notes and tell the doctors or nurses when you don’t understand what they’re saying. You might want to bring another person with you when you see your doctor and have them take notes to help you remember what was said.
Not all of these questions will apply to you, but they should help get you started. Be sure to write down some questions of your own. For instance, you might want more information about recovery times or you may want to ask about nearby or online support groups where you can talk with other women going through similar situations. You may also want to ask if you qualify for any clinical trials.
Keep in mind that doctors aren’t the only ones who can give you information. Other health care professionals, such as nurses and social workers, can answer some of your questions. To find out more about speaking with your health care team, see The Doctor-Patient Relationship.
When you’re told you have breast cancer

Exactly what type of breast cancer do I have?
How big is the cancer? Where exactly is it?
Has the cancer spread to my lymph nodes or other organs?
What is the stage of my cancer? What does it mean?
Will I need any other tests before we can decide on treatment?
Do I need to see any other doctors or health professionals?
What is the hormone receptor status of my cancer? What does this mean?
What is the HER2 status of my cancer? What does this mean?
What is the grade of my cancer? What does this mean?
How do these factors affect my treatment options and long-term outlook (prognosis)?
What are my chances of survival, based on my cancer as you see it?
Should I think about genetic testing? What are my testing options? Should I take a home-based genetic test? What would be the reasons for and against testing?
How do I get a copy of my pathology report?
If I’m worried about the costs and insurance coverage for my diagnosis and treatment, who can help me?

When deciding on a treatment plan

How much experience do you have treating this type of cancer?
Should I get a second opinion? How do I do that? Will getting a second opinion delay my treatment and can that affect my outcome? 
What are my treatment choices?
What treatment do you recommend and why?
Should I think about taking part in a clinical trial?
What would the goal of the treatment be?
How soon do I need to start treatment?
How long will treatment last? What will it be like? Where will it be done?
Should my biopsy tissue be sent for a gene expression test to help decide if chemotherapy might be helpful for me?
Are there other molecular or protein tests that need to be done on my cancer tissue to help decide my treatment options?
What should I do to get ready for treatment?
What risks or side effects are there to the treatments you suggest? Are there things I can do to reduce these side effects?
How will treatment affect my daily activities? Can I still work fulltime?
Will I lose my hair? If so, what can I do about it?
Will I go through menopause as a result of the treatment? Will I be able to have children after treatment? Would I be able to breastfeed?
Do I have time to freeze my eggs before starting treatment? What are my options?
What are the chances the cancer will come back (recur) after this treatment?
What would we do if the treatment doesn’t work or if the cancer comes back?
What if I have transportation problems getting to and from treatment?

If you need surgery

Is breast-conserving surgery (lumpectomy) an option for me? Why or why not?
What are the positive and negative sides of breast-conserving surgery versus mastectomy?
How many surgeries like mine have you done?
Will you have to take out lymph nodes? If so, would you advise a sentinel lymph node biopsy? Why or why not?
What side effects might lymph node removal cause?
How long will I be in the hospital?
Will I have stitches or staples at the surgery site? Will there be a drain (tube) coming out of the site?
How do I care for the surgery site? Will I need someone to help me?
What will my breasts look and feel like after my surgery? Will I have normal feeling in them?
What will the scar look like?
Is breast reconstruction surgery an option if I want it? What would it mean in my case?
Can I have reconstruction at the same time as the surgery to remove the cancer? What are the reasons for and against having it done right away or waiting until later?
What types of reconstruction might be options for me?
Could you recommend a plastic surgeon I could speak to about reconstruction options?
Will I need a breast form (prosthesis), and if so, where can I get one?
Do I need to stop taking any medications or supplements before surgery?
When should I call your office if I’m having side effects or concerns?

During treatment
Once treatment begins, you’ll need to know what to expect and what to look for. Not all of these questions may apply to you, but asking the ones that do may be helpful.

How will we know if the treatment is working?
Is there anything I can do to help manage side effects?
What symptoms or side effects should I tell you about right away?
How can I reach you on nights, holidays, or weekends?
Will I need to change what I eat during treatment?
Are there any limits on what I can do?
Can I exercise during treatment? If so, what kind of exercise should I do, and how often?
Can you suggest a mental health professional I can see if I start to feel overwhelmed, depressed, or distressed?
Will I need special tests, such as imaging scans or blood tests during treatment? If so, how often?

After treatment

Will I need a special diet after treatment?
Are there any limits on what I can do?
Am I at risk for lymphedema?
What can I do to reduce my risk for lymphedema?
What should I do if I notice swelling in my arm?
What other symptoms should I watch for? What kind of exercise should I do now?
What type of follow-up will I need after treatment?
How often will I need to have follow-up exams, blood tests, or imaging tests?
How will we know if the cancer has come back? What should I watch for?
What will my options be if the cancer comes back?A woman who has surgery to treat breast cancer might also choose to have surgery to rebuild the shape and look of her breast. This is called breast reconstruction surgery. If you are thinking about having this done, it is best to talk about it with your surgeon and a plastic surgeon experienced in breast reconstruction before you have surgery to remove the tumor or breast. This lets the surgical teams plan the best treatment for you, even if you decide to wait and have reconstructive surgery later.
Reasons to have breast reconstruction
A woman might choose to have breast reconstruction for many reasons:

To make her chest look balanced when she is wearing a bra or swimsuit
To help make clothes fit better
To permanently regain her breast shape
So she won’t have to use a breast form that fits inside the bra (an external prosthesis)
To feel better about her body

Breast reconstruction often leaves scars, but they usually fade over time. Newer techniques have also reduced the amount of scarring. When you’re wearing a bra, your breasts should be alike enough in size and shape to let you feel comfortable about how you look in most types of clothes.
After a lumpectomy or mastectomy, breast reconstruction can make you feel better about how you look and renew your self-confidence. But keep in mind that the reconstructed breast will not be a perfect match or substitute for your natural breast. If tissue from your tummy, back, thigh, or buttocks was used as part of the reconstruction, those areas will also look different after surgery. Before you make your decision, talk with your surgeon about scars and changes in shape or contour. Ask where they will be, and how they will look and feel after they heal.
Risks of breast reconstruction
Of course, it's important to consider the potential risks and side effects of breast reconstruction surgery as well. These are discussed in What to Expect After Breast Reconstruction Surgery.
Can reconstructed breasts hide cancer or make it come back?
Studies show that reconstruction does not make breast cancer come back. If the cancer does come back, reconstructed breasts should not cause problems finding the cancer or treating it.  
If you are thinking about having breast reconstruction, either with an implant or tissue flap (your own tissue), you need to know that reconstruction rarely hides a return of breast cancer. You should not consider this a big risk when deciding to have breast reconstruction.
Some important things to think about

You might have a choice between having breast reconstruction at the same time as your breast cancer surgery (immediate reconstruction) or later (delayed reconstruction).
Some women don’t want to make decisions about reconstruction while being treated for breast cancer. If this is the case, you might choose to wait until after your surgery to decide about delayed reconstruction.
You might not want to have more surgery than is absolutely needed.
Not all reconstructive surgery is a total success, and the result might not look the way you had hoped. It is important to discuss expectations with your plastic surgeon. 
The cancer surgery and reconstruction surgery will leave scars on your breast and any areas where tissue was moved to create the new breast mound, such as the buttocks, tummy, thigh, or back areas.
A rebuilt breast will not have the same feeling as the natural breast. Sometimes, it may have little or no feeling at all. The places the tissue to rebuild the breast was taken from (donor sites) might also lose some feeling. Over time, the skin might become more sensitive, but it won’t feel the same as it did before the surgery.
You might have extra concerns if you tend to bleed or scar more than most people.
Poor blood flow might cause some or all areas of the breast skin or flaps to die after reconstructive surgery. This death of the tissue is called necrosis. If it happens, healing is delayed and more surgery is often needed to fix the problem.
Healing could be affected by previous surgery, chemotherapy, or radiation therapy. It can also be affected by smoking, diabetes, being obese, and other factors.
Surgeons might suggest you wait to have reconstruction, especially if you smoke or have other health problems. It’s often recommended to quit smoking at least 2 months before reconstructive surgery to allow for better healing. You might not be able to have reconstruction at all if you are obese, actively smoke, or have blood circulation problems.
The surgeon might suggest surgery to reshape your other breast to match the reconstructed breast. This is a called a symmetrizing procedure. This could include reducing or enlarging its size, or even surgically lifting the breast.
If radiation will be﻿ part of a woman's treatment, the types of immediate reconstruction surgery she will be able to have might be limited. Certain types of reconstruction done before radiation can cause problems and lower the chances the rebuilt breast will look and feel as natural as possible, after the radiation is given.  You should discuss your best options with your plastic surgeon before surgery.
Meeting with a plastic surgeon and knowing your reconstruction options before surgery can help you have more realistic expectations for the outcomes.

Help and support from someone who’s been there
It's important to know that there is advice and support out there to help you understand your reconstruction options as well as cope with the changes you’re going through if you have chosen reconstruction. Speaking with your doctor or other members of your health care team is often a good place to start. If you would like to talk with someone who has had your type of reconstruction, ask about our Reach To Recovery® program. Reach To Recovery volunteers are breast cancer survivors trained to support others facing breast cancer, as well as those who are thinking about having breast reconstruction. They can give you suggestions, reading material, and advice. Ask someone on your cancer care team to refer you to a volunteer or program in your area or call us at 1-800-227-2345﻿.Some women who have breast cancer surgery as part of their breast cancer treatment decide not to have breast reconstruction.
They might decide they don’t want to have any more surgery than they need to treat the cancer, or that they want to be able to get back to their normal activities as soon as possible. Some women are just more comfortable with how they look and feel after the surgery to remove their cancer. Cost might also be an issue, especially for women who don’t have insurance coverage. If a woman changes her mind later, reconstruction is usually still an option. But keep in mind that it may be easier to get the result you want if you make the decision before you have the breast cancer surgery.
For other women, breast reconstruction might be difficult, or even not possible, because of other health issues they have. For example, you might not be able to have reconstruction if you are obese or have blood circulation problems, such as from continued smoking or poorly controlled diabetes.
Women who don’t want breast reconstruction after surgery have two options:

Using a breast form or prosthesis (inside the bra or attached to the body to wear under their clothes)
Going flat (not wearing a breast form)

Using a breast form or prosthesis
A breast form is a prosthesis (artificial body part) worn either inside a bra or attached to the body to simulate the look and feel of a natural breast. Wearing a breast form is an option for women who have decided not to get reconstructive surgery but want to keep the same look under their clothes. If you haven’t decided about reconstruction, or are having reconstruction later, you might decide to use a breast form for a while.
Most breast forms are made from materials that try to copy the movement, feel, and weight of natural breast tissue. A properly weighted form provides the balance your body needs for correct posture and anchors your bra, keeping it from riding up. At first, these forms may feel too heavy, but in time they should begin to feel natural.
If you are planning to use a breast form, your doctor will tell you when you have healed enough to be fitted for a permanent breast form or prosthesis.
Choosing the right bra for your breast form
The right bra for you may very well be the one you have always worn. It may or may not need adjustments. If there is tenderness during healing, a bra extender (small pieces of fabric that attach to your bra fastener) can help by increasing the width of the bra so that it does not wrap around the chest too tightly. Women with large, heavy breasts can lessen pressure on shoulder straps by sliding a bra shoulder pad under one or both straps.
If you decide to wear your breast form in a pocket in your bra, you can have your regular bra altered. There are also special mastectomy bras with the pockets already sewn in. If the breast form causes any kind of skin irritation, use a bra with a pocket. If your bra has underwires, you may be able to wear it, but be sure to clear this with your doctor.
If you want to wear your prosthesis under sleepwear but would like something more comfortable than a regular bra, look for a soft bra, sometimes called a leisure or night bra. These are in most department stores.
Finding and paying for breast prostheses
Prices for breast forms vary considerably. High price doesn't necessarily mean that the product is the best for you. Take time to shop for a good fit, comfort, and an attractive, natural appearance in the bra and under clothing. Your clothes should fit the way they did before surgery.
Insurance coverage of breast prostheses is not all the same. Be sure to contact your health insurance company to find out what will be covered and how you must submit claims. Also, ask your doctor to write prescriptions for your prosthesis and for any special mastectomy bras. When purchasing bras or breast forms, mark the bills and any checks you write "surgical." Medicare and Medicaid can be used to pay for some of these expenses if you are eligible. The cost of breast forms and bras with pockets and the cost of having a bra altered might be tax deductible. Keep careful records of all related expenses.
Some insurance companies will not cover both a breast prosthesis and reconstructive surgery. That can mean that if you submit a claim for a prosthesis or bra to your insurance company, in some cases the company will not cover reconstruction, should you choose this procedure in the future. Make sure you get all the facts before submitting any insurance claims.
Going flat
Some women, who do not have reconstruction surgery, decide not to wear a breast form, either.
For most women, there aren’t likely to be any added health issues from going flat, especially if both breasts were removed. But if you’ve only had one breast removed, you might notice issues with balance, posture, or back pain, especially if you have large breasts. This is one reason some women prefer to wear a breast form – to balance out the weight on their chest. Talk to your doctor about your options if you think this might be an issue for you.
Some women might use a breast form when they are out, but not when at home. This might be because they find breast forms uncomfortable or too expensive, or just because they’re comfortable with how they look and feel without a breast form and don’t feel the need to wear one﻿.
If the idea of going flat appeals to you but you’re worried about what others might think, try going without a breast form in different situations, such as at home, out with friends, or while out running errands. You might find that most people won’t notice a difference. If you find you still feel self-conscious, you can always go back to wearing a breast form.
If you decide to go flat, you might want to consider wearing clothing that might help you feel more comfortable with your appearance. Try wearing tops that are not tight fitting and that have busy patterns, or layer sweaters or jackets over close-fitting tops. Scarves and shawls can also cover all or part of your chest.
Some women might like the idea of going flat but are uncomfortable about not having nipples. Some companies now make nipple prosthetics, which are made of silicone or other materials and look and feel like real nipples. They can be attached to the chest and then taken off when you choose.Women who have had surgery to treat breast cancer can choose from several types of breast reconstruction. When deciding what type is best for you, you and your doctors should discuss factors including your health and your personal preferences. Take the time to learn what options are available to you and consider talking to others who have had that procedure before you make a decision.
Types of breast reconstruction procedures
Several types of reconstructive surgery are available, and often the process means more than one operation. Give yourself plenty of time to make the best decision for you. You should make your decision about breast reconstruction only after you are fully informed.
The two main types of breast reconstruction are implant reconstruction and tissue (flap) reconstruction. Sometimes the implant and flap procedures are used together to rebuild a breast. 
For all types of breast reconstruction there is often an opportunity for future “touch up” procedures, such as fat grafting and scar revisions. Breast reconstruction can also recreate the nipple-areolar area that can be done with a small surgical procedure, tattooing, or a combination of both. This is done to help make the reconstructed breast look more like the original breast.
For information about the procedures to reconstruct the shape of your breast or breasts see the following pages:

Breast Reconstruction After Breast-Conserving Surgery 
Breast Reconstruction Using Implants 
Breast Reconstruction Using Your Own Body Tissues (Flap Procedures)
Reconstructing the Nipple and Areola After Breast Surgery

Choosing which type of breast reconstruction to have
If you’ve decided to have breast reconstruction, you’ll still have many things to think about as you and your doctors talk about what type of reconstruction might be best for you. Some of the factors you and your doctors will need to think about when considering your options include:

Your overall health (including issues that might affect your healing, such as smoking or certain health conditions)
The size and location of your breast cancer
Your breast size
The extent of your breast cancer surgery - if you are a candidate for lumpectomy or mastectomy, and the possibility to keep your nipple
Whether you will need cancer treatments other than surgery
The amount of tissue available for reconstruction (for example, very thin women may not have enough extra tummy tissue to use this area for breast reconstruction and having a "tummy tuck" in the past makes the tummy tissue not usable for breast reconstruction)
Whether you want reconstructive surgery on one or both breasts
Your desire to match the look of the other breast
Your insurance coverage and related costs for the unaffected breast
How quickly you want to be able to recover from surgery
Your willingness to have more than one surgery as part of the reconstruction
How different types of reconstructive surgery might affect other parts of your body

Your surgeon will review your medical history and overall health, and will explain which reconstructive options might be best for you based on your age, health, body type, lifestyle, goals, and other factors. Talk with your surgeon openly about your preferences. Be sure to voice any concerns and priorities you have for the reconstruction and find a surgeon you feel comfortable with. Your surgeon should explain the limits, risks, and benefits of each option.If you’ve been diagnosed with breast cancer and are considering breast reconstruction, it’s important to find out as much as you can about what to expect. Your breast surgeon can help you find a plastic surgeon who should be able to explain all of your choices and answer your questions. Here are some questions to ask to help get you started. Be sure you get all of your questions answered, so that you can make the best decisions for you about breast reconstruction.
Finding the right plastic surgeon for your breast reconstruction
If you decide to have breast reconstruction, it is best to find an experienced board-certified plastic surgeon. Your breast surgeon can suggest doctors for you. To find a board-certified plastic surgeon in your area, or to find out if your surgeon is board certified, contact the American Board of Plastic Surgeons.
Getting a second opinion
You might want to get a second opinion before having surgery, so you know all of your options before reconstruction surgery, or even mastectomy. It’s important for you to make the right decisions based on complete information.
Questions to ask about breast reconstruction
It’s very important to get all of your questions answered by your plastic surgeon before having breast reconstruction. If you don’t understand something, ask your surgeon about it. You might want to take notes or bring a partner or friend with you to the doctor's appointment to help remember what was said and to help ask other questions.
Here are some questions to get you started. Write down other questions as you think of them. The answers to these questions may help you make your decisions.

Can I have breast reconstruction?
When can the reconstruction be done?
What are the reasons for and against doing it at the same time as my cancer surgery (immediate reconstruction) versus waiting (delayed reconstruction)?
Will reconstruction interfere with chemotherapy?
Will reconstruction interfere with radiation therapy?
What types of reconstruction could I have?
What are the risks and benefits of each option?
What type of reconstruction do you think would be best for me? Why?
What’s the average cost of each type? Will my insurance cover them?
How long would it take me to recover from each type?
How many of these procedures have you (plastic surgeon) done each year?
What results can I expect?
Will the reconstructed breast look like my other breast?
Should I consider surgery on the other breast also to help them look alike?
Could I have the nipple reconstructed if I choose to? How would this be done?
How will my reconstructed breast(s) feel to the touch? Will I have any feeling in my reconstructed breast(s)?
What possible problems should I know about?
If using a tissue flap, will there be pain, scars, or other changes in the parts of my body where the tissue is taken from?
If using a tissue flap, will you also need to place an implant to give the reconstructed breast a better shape? 
If I get a breast implant, how long will it last?
What type of implant will you use for my reconstructed breast---smooth or textured? Saline or silicone?
Will I need to get extra imaging tests depending on the type of implant I get? Will my insurance cover those extra tests?
What kinds of changes to the breast can I expect over time?
Will I need more surgery in a few years because of possible complications? 
How will aging affect the reconstructed breast?
How will I know if the implant is ruptured?
Are there any new reconstruction options that I should know about, including clinical trials?
Can you show me pictures of typical results?
Can I talk with other women who have had the same surgery?As you get ready for breast reconstruction surgery, ask your surgeon what to expect. Your surgeon can help you be as prepared as possible. You want to have realistic expectations of how your body will look and feel after surgery, and understand the benefits and risks of the type of reconstruction you are having. Ask questions and follow your surgeon’s instructions carefully. Some questions that may help you know what to expect include:

What should I do to get ready for surgery?
If I smoke, when is the best time to stop before surgery?
How much discomfort or pain will I feel after surgery?
How long will I be in the hospital?
Will I need blood transfusions?
How long will it take me to recover?
What will I need to do at home to care for my incisions (surgical scars)?
Will I have a drain (tube that lets fluid out of the wound) when I go home?
How much help will I need at home to take care of my drain and wound?
Will I be taught exercises to do after surgery? When can I start them?
How much activity can I do at home?
What do I do if my arm swells?
When will I be able to go back to normal activities such as driving and working﻿?

Breast reconstruction can make you feel better about how you look and renew your self-confidence, but keep in mind that the reconstructed breast will not be a perfect match or substitute for your natural breast. If tissue from your tummy, back, thigh, or buttocks will be used, those areas will also look different after surgery. Talk with your surgeon about surgical scars and changes in shape or contour. Ask where they will be, and how they will look and feel after they heal.
Your surgeon or other involved doctors/staff should explain the details of your surgery, including:

The drugs (anesthesia) that will be used to make you sleep and not feel pain during the surgery
Where the surgery will be done
How long the surgery will take
Possible complications of surgery (long-term and short-term)
What to expect after surgery
The plan for follow-up
Costs associated with the surgery

Understanding your surgery costs
Health insurance policies often cover most or all of the cost of reconstruction after a mastectomy, but this might not always be the case if you have reconstruction after breast-conserving surgery (lumpectomy or partial mastectomy). Check your policy to make sure you are covered, and find out what portion of the bill you’ll be expected to pay. Also, see if there are any limits on what types of reconstruction are covered.
Before surgery, make sure your insurance company will not deny breast reconstruction costs (for mastectomy or lumpectomy). Your surgeon may be able to help you with this if your insurance plan wants to deny coverage, so be sure to ask if you need help. It may take some time and effort. In the past, health plans have denied coverage for certain reconstruction procedures despite federal laws that require coverage in most cases. They often reverse such decisions on appeal.
Getting ready for surgery
Your breast surgeon and your plastic surgeon should give you clear instructions on how to prepare for surgery. These will probably include:

Help with quitting smoking, if you smoke
Instructions to take or avoid certain vitamins, medicines, and dietary or herbal supplements for a period of time before your surgery
Instructions on eating and drinking before surgery

Plan to have someone take you home after your surgery or your stay in the hospital. You may also need them to stay and help you out for a few days or longer.
Where your surgery will be done
Breast reconstruction often means having more than one operation. The first creates the breast mound. This may be done at the same time as the mastectomy or later on. It’s usually done in a hospital.
Follow-up procedures such as filling expanders or creating the nipple and areola are most often done in an outpatient facility. But this decision depends on how much surgery is needed and what your surgeon prefers, so you’ll need to ask about this.
What anesthesia will be used
The first stage of reconstruction is almost always done using general anesthesia. This means you’ll be given drugs to make you sleep and not feel pain during the surgery.
Follow-up procedures may only need local anesthesia. This means that only the area the doctor is working on will be numbed. A sedative drug may also be used to make you feel relaxed but awake. You might feel some discomfort.
Possible risks of breast reconstruction surgery
Any type of surgery has risks , and breast reconstruction may pose certain unique problems for some women. Your surgeon will go over the possible risks of reconstruction surgery with you. Be sure to ask questions if there’s anything you’re not sure about. For more on the possible risks after surgery, see What to Expect After Breast Reconstruction Surgery.It’s important to have an idea of what to expect after surgery to rebuild your breast, including the possible risks and side effects. How long it takes you to recover from surgery will depend on the type of reconstruction you have. Most women begin to feel better in a couple of weeks and can return to usual activities in a couple of months. Talk to your cancer care team about what you can expect. Be sure you understand how to take care of your surgery sites and how to follow up with your breast care, including regular mammograms and other breast imaging tests depending on the surgery you have had.​
Possible risks during and after reconstruction surgery
Any type of surgery has risks, and breast reconstruction may pose certain unique problems for some women. Even though many of these are not common, some of the possible risks and side effects during or soon after surgery include:

Problems with the anesthesia
Bleeding
Blood clots
Fluid build-up in the breast or the donor site (for a tissue flap), with swelling and pain
Infection at the surgery site(s)
Wound healing problems
Extreme tiredness (fatigue)

Problems that can develop later on include:

Tissue death (necrosis) of all or part of a tissue flap, skin, or fat
Loss of or changes in nipple and breast sensation
Problems at the donor site, such as loss of muscle strength, bulging of the abdominal (belly) wall, and dimples in the skin
The need for more surgery to fix problems that come up
Changes in the arm on the same side as the reconstructed breast
Problems with a breast implant, such as movement, leakage, rupture, rippling (when an implant or the skin over the implant wrinkles), or scar tissue formation (capsular contracture)
Development of a rare type of cancer in the scar tissue around a breast implant
Uneven breasts

Risks of infection
Infection can happen with any surgery, most often in the first couple of weeks after the operation. If you have an implant, it might have to be removed until the infection clears. A new implant can be put in later. If you have a tissue flap, surgery may be needed to clean the wound.
Risks of capsular contracture
The most common problem with breast implants is capsular contracture. A scar (or capsule) can form around the soft implant. As it tightens, it can start to squeeze the implant, making the breast feel hard and look distorted. Capsular contracture can be treated. Sometimes surgery can remove the scar tissue, or the implant can be removed or replaced.
Additional risks for women who smoke
Using tobacco narrows blood vessels and reduces the supply of blood, nutrients, and oxygen to tissues. Smoking can delay healing in any surgery and is linked to a higher chance of wound complications. This can cause more noticeable scars and a longer recovery time. Sometimes these problems are bad enough that a second operation is needed to fix them. You may be asked to quit smoking a few weeks or months before surgery to reduce these risks. This can be hard to do, so ask your doctor for help. Sometimes your plastic surgeon might choose to delay your surgery until you stop smoking. 
Recovering after reconstruction surgery
You’re likely to feel tired and sore for a week or 2 after implant surgery, or longer after a flap procedure (which will leave you with 2 surgical wounds). Your doctor will give you medicines to help control pain and other discomfort.
Depending on the type of surgery you have, you will most likely be able to go home from the hospital within a few days. You may be discharged with one or more drains in place. A drain is a small tube that’s put in the wound to remove extra fluid from the surgery site while it heals. In most cases, fluid drains into a little hollow ball that you’ll learn how to empty before you leave the hospital. The doctor will decide when the drains can be safely removed depending on how much fluid is collecting each day. Follow your doctor’s instructions on wound and drain care. Also be sure to ask what kind of support garments you should wear. If you have any concerns or questions, ask someone on your cancer care team.
Getting back to normal
Most women can start to get back to normal activities within 6 to 8 weeks. If implants are used without flaps, your recovery time may be shorter. Some things to keep in mind:

Certain types of reconstruction surgery do not restore normal feeling to your breast, but in other types some feeling might return over time.
It may take up to about 8 weeks for bruising and swelling to go away. Try to be patient as you wait to see the final result.
It may take as long as 1 to 2 years for tissues to heal fully and scars to fade (the scars never go away completely).
Ask when you can wear regular bras. Talk with your surgeon about the type of bra to wear – sometimes it will depend on the type of surgery you had. After you heal, underwires and lace in your bra might feel uncomfortable if they press on scars or rub your skin.
Follow your surgeon’s advice on when to begin stretching exercises and normal activities, because it’s different with different types of reconstruction. As a basic rule, you’ll want to avoid overhead lifting, strenuous sports, and some sexual activities for 4 to 6 weeks after reconstruction. Check with your surgeon for specific guidance.
Women who have reconstruction months or years after a mastectomy may go through a period of emotional adjustment once they’ve had their breast reconstructed. Just as it takes time to get used to the loss of a breast, it takes time to start thinking of the reconstructed breast as your own. Talking with other women who have had breast reconstruction might be helpful. Talking with a mental health professional might also help you deal with anxiety  and other distressing feelings.
Silicone gel implants can open up or leak inside the breast without causing symptoms. Surgeons usually recommend getting regular magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of implants to make sure they aren’t leaking. (This isn’t needed with saline implants.) You’ll likely have your first MRI 1 to 3 years after your implant surgery and every 2 years from then on, although it may vary by implant. Your insurance might not cover this. Be sure to talk to your doctor about long-term follow-up.
Call your doctor right away if you notice any new skin changes, swelling, lumps, pain, or fluid leaking from the breast, armpit, or flap donor site, or if you have other symptoms that concern you.

Talk to your doctor about mammograms
Women who have had a mastectomy to treat breast cancer generally do not need routine screening mammograms on the side that was affected by cancer (although they still need them on the other breast). There isn’t enough tissue remaining after a mastectomy to do a mammogram. Cancer can come back in the skin or chest wall on that side, but if this happens it’s more likely to be found on a physical exam.
It’s possible for women with reconstructed breasts to get mammograms, but experts agree that women who have breast reconstruction after a mastectomy don’t need routine mammograms. Still, if an area of concern is found during a physical exam, a diagnostic mammogram may be done. (Ultrasound or MRI may also be used to look at the area closely.)
If you’re not sure what type of mastectomy you had or if you need to have mammograms, ask your doctor.Most women with breast cancer have some type of surgery as part of their treatment. There are different types of breast surgery, and they may be done for different reasons, depending on the situation. For example, surgery may be done to:

Remove as much of the cancer as possible (breast-conserving surgery or mastectomy)
Find out whether the cancer has spread to the lymph nodes under the arm (sentinel lymph node biopsy or axillary lymph node dissection)
Restore the breast’s shape after the cancer is removed (breast reconstruction)
Relieve symptoms of advanced cancer

Your doctor may recommend a certain operation based on your breast cancer features and your medical history, or you may have a choice about which type of surgery to have. It’s important to know your options so you can talk about them with your doctor and make the choice that is right for you.
Surgery to remove breast cancer
There are two main types of surgery to remove breast cancer:

Breast-conserving surgery is surgery to remove the cancer as well as some surrounding normal tissue. Only the part of the breast containing the cancer is removed. How much breast is removed depends on where and how big the tumor is, as well as other factors. This surgery is also called a lumpectomy, quadrantectomy, partial mastectomy, or segmental mastectomy.
Mastectomy is a surgery in which the entire breast is removed, including all of the breast tissue and sometimes other nearby tissues. There are several different types of mastectomies. Some women may also have both breasts removed in a double mastectomy.

Choosing between breast-conserving surgery and mastectomy
Many women with early-stage cancers can choose between having breast-conserving surgery (BCS) and mastectomy. The main advantage of BCS is that a woman keeps most of her breast. But most often, she will also need radiation. Women who have mastectomy for early-stage cancers are less likely to need radiation.
For some women, mastectomy may be a better option or the only option, because of the type of breast cancer, the large size of the tumor, previous treatment with radiation, or certain other factors.
Some women might worry that having a less extensive surgery might raise the risk of the cancer coming back. But studies of thousands of women over more than 20 years show that when BCS is done with radiation, survival is the same as having a mastectomy, in people with early-stage cancer who are candidates for both types of surgery.
Surgery to remove nearby lymph nodes
To find out if the breast cancer has spread to underarm (axillary) lymph nodes, one or more of these lymph nodes will be removed and looked at in the lab. This is important to figuring out the stage (how big and where it has spread) of the cancer. Lymph nodes may be removed either as part of the surgery to remove the breast cancer or as a separate operation.
The two main types of surgery to remove lymph nodes are:

Sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB) is a procedure in which the surgeon injects a dye and then removes only the lymph node(s) under the arm that have taken up the dye. These lymph nodes are where the cancer would likely spread first. Removing only one or a few lymph nodes lowers the risk of side effects that can happen after an axillary lymph node dissection (below), such as arm swelling that is also known as lymphedema.
Axillary lymph node dissection (ALND) is a procedure that does not use a dye and in which the surgeon removes many (usually less than 20) underarm lymph nodes. ALND is not done as often as it was in the past, but it might still be the best way to look at the lymph nodes in some situations.

To learn more about these procedures, see Lymph Node Surgery for Breast Cancer. 
Wire localization to guide surgery
Sometimes, if the cancer in your breast can’t be felt, is hard to find, and/or is difficult to get to, the surgeon might use a mammogram or ultrasound to guide a wire to the right spot. This is called wire localization or needle localization. If a mammogram is used you may hear the term stereotactic wire localization. Rarely, an MRI might be used if using the mammogram or ultrasound is not successful.  
After medicine is injected into your breast to numb the area, a mammogram or ultrasound is used to guide a thin hollow needle to the abnormal area. Once the tip of the needle is in the right spot, a thin wire is put in through the center of the needle. A small hook at the end of the wire keeps it in place. The needle is then taken out. Once in the operating room, the surgeon uses the wire as a guide to find the part of the breast to be removed.
The surgery done as part of the wire localization may be enough to count as breast-conserving surgery if all of the cancer is taken out and the margins are negative. If cancer cells are found at or near the edge of the removed tissue (also called a positive or close margin), more surgery may be needed.  
It should be noted that a wire-localization procedure is sometimes used to perform a surgical biopsy of a suspicious area in the breast to find out if it is cancer or not. 
There are other ways a surgeon can be guided to the tumor, but these techniques are newer and not used in every facility.
Breast reconstruction after surgery
Many woman having surgery for breast cancer might have the option of breast reconstruction. A woman having a mastectomy might want to consider having the breast mound rebuilt to restore the breast’s appearance after surgery. In some breast-conserving surgeries, a woman may consider having fat grafted into the affected breast to correct any dimples left from the surgery. The options will depend on each woman’s situation.
There are several types of reconstructive surgery, but your options depend on your medical situation and personal preferences. You may have a choice between having breast reconstruction at the same time as the breast cancer surgery (immediate reconstruction) or at a later time (delayed reconstruction).
If you are thinking about having reconstructive surgery, it’s a good idea to discuss it with your breast surgeon and a plastic surgeon before your mastectomy or BCS. This gives the surgical team time to plan out the treatment options that might be best for you, even if you wait and have the reconstructive surgery later.
To learn about different breast reconstruction options, see Breast Reconstruction Surgery.
Surgery for advanced breast cancer
Although surgery is very unlikely to cure breast cancer that has spread to other parts of the body, it can still be helpful in some situations, either as a way to slow the spread of the cancer, or to help prevent or relieve symptoms from it. For example, surgery might be used:

When the breast tumor is causing an open wound in the breast (or chest)
To treat a small number of areas of cancer metastases in a certain part of the body, such as the brain
When an area of cancer is pressing on the spinal cord or in a bone that weakens it or causes it to break
To treat a blockage in the liver
To provide relief of pain or other symptoms

If your doctor recommends surgery for advanced breast cancer, it’s important that you understand if it’s to try to cure the cancer or to prevent or treat symptoms.Radiation therapy is treatment with high-energy rays (or particles) that destroy cancer cells. Some women with breast cancer will need radiation, in addition to other treatments.
Depending on the breast cancer's stage and other factors, radiation therapy can be used in several situations:

After breast-conserving surgery (BCS), to help lower the chance that the cancer will come back in the same breast or nearby lymph nodes.
After a mastectomy, especially if the cancer was larger than 5 cm (about 2 inches), if cancer is found in many lymph nodes, or if certain surgical margins, such as the skin or muscle, have cancer cells.
If cancer has spread to other parts of the body, such as the bones, spinal cord, or brain.

Types of radiation therapy for breast cancer
The main types of radiation therapy that can be used to treat breast cancer are:

External beam radiation therapy
Brachytherapy

External beam radiation therapy (EBRT)
EBRT is the most common type of radiation therapy for women with breast cancer. A machine outside the body focuses the radiation on the area affected by the cancer.
Which areas need radiation depends on whether you had a mastectomy or breast-conserving surgery (BCS) and if the cancer has reached nearby lymph nodes.

If you had a mastectomy and no lymph nodes had cancer cells, radiation will be focused on the chest wall, the mastectomy scar, and the places where any drains exited the body after surgery.
If you had BCS, you will most likely have radiation to the entire breast (called whole breast radiation). An extra boost of radiation to the area in the breast where the cancer was removed (called the tumor bed) is often given if there is a high risk of the cancer coming back. The boost is often given after the treatments to the whole breast have ended. It uses the same machine, with lower amounts of radiation aimed at the tumor bed. Most women don’t notice different side effects from boost radiation than from whole breast radiation.
If cancer was found in the lymph nodes under the arm (axillary lymph nodes), this area may be given radiation, as well. Sometimes, the area treated might also include the nodes above the collarbone (supraclavicular lymph nodes) and the nodes beneath the breast bone in the center of the chest (internal mammary lymph nodes).

If you will need external beam radiation therapy after surgery, it is usually not started until your surgery site has healed, which often takes a month or longer. If you are getting chemotherapy as well, radiation treatments are usually delayed until chemotherapy is done. Some treatments after surgery, like hormone therapy or HER2 targeted therapy, can be given at the same time as radiation.
Types and schedules of external beam radiation for breast cancer
Whole breast radiation
Radiation to the entire affected breast is called whole breast radiation.

The standard schedule for getting whole breast radiation is 5 days a week (Monday through Friday) for about 6 to 7 weeks.
Another option is hypofractionated radiation therapy where the radiation is also given to the whole breast, but in larger daily doses (Monday through Friday) using fewer treatments (typically for only 3 to 4 weeks). For women who have had breast-conserving surgery (BCS) and whose cancer has not spread to underarm lymph nodes, this schedule has been shown to be just as good at keeping the cancer from coming back in the same breast as giving the radiation over longer periods of time. It might also lead to fewer short-term side effects.

Accelerated partial breast irradiation
After whole breast radiation or even after surgery alone, most breast cancers tend to come back very close to the area where the tumor was removed (tumor bed). For this reason, some doctors are using accelerated partial breast irradiation (APBI) in selected women to give larger doses over a shorter time to only one part of the breast (the tumor bed) compared to the entire breast (whole breast radiation). Since more research is needed to know if these newer methods will have the same long-term results as standard radiation, not all doctors use them. There are several different types of accelerated partial breast irradiation:

Intraoperative radiation therapy (IORT): In this approach, a single large dose of radiation is given to the area where the tumor was removed (tumor bed) in the operating room right after BCS (before the breast incision is closed). IORT requires special equipment and is not widely available.


3D-conformal radiotherapy (3D-CRT): In this technique, the radiation is given with special machines so that it is better aimed at the tumor bed. This spares more of the surrounding normal breast tissue. Treatments are given twice a day for 5 days or daily for 2 weeks.
Intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT): IMRT is like 3D-CRT, but it also changes the strength of some of the beams in certain areas. This gets stronger doses to certain parts of the tumor bed and helps lessen damage to nearby normal body tissues.
Brachytherapy: See brachytherapy below.

Women who are interested in these approaches may want to ask their doctor about taking part in clinical trials of accelerated partial breast irradiation.
Chest wall radiation
If you had a mastectomy and none of the lymph nodes had cancer, radiation will be given to the entire chest wall, the mastectomy scar, and the areas of any surgical drains. It is typically given every day, 5 days a week, for 6 weeks.
Lymph node radiation
Whether or not you have had BCS or a mastectomy, if cancer was found in the lymph nodes under the arm (axillary lymph nodes), this area may be given radiation. In certain cases, the lymph nodes above the collarbone (supraclavicular lymph nodes) and behind the breastbone in the center of the chest (internal mammary lymph nodes) will also get radiation along with the underarm nodes. It is typically given daily 5 days a week for 6 weeks at the same time as the radiation to the breast or chest wall is given.
Possible side effects of external beam radiation
The main short-term side effects of external beam radiation therapy to the breast are:

Swelling in the breast
Skin changes in the treated area similar to a sunburn (redness, skin peeling, darkening of the skin)
Fatigue

Your health care team may advise you to avoid exposing the treated skin to the sun because it could make the skin changes worse. Most skin changes get better within a few months. Changes to the breast tissue usually go away in 6 to 12 months, but it can take longer.
External beam radiation therapy can also cause side effects later on:

Some women may find that radiation therapy causes the breast to become smaller and the skin to become firmer or swollen.
Radiation may affect your options for breast reconstruction later on. It can also raise the risk of problems with appearance and healing if it’s given after reconstruction, especially tissue flap procedures.
Women who have had breast radiation may not be able to breastfeed from the radiated breast.
Radiation to the breast can sometimes damage some of the nerves to the arm. This is called brachial plexopathy and can lead to numbness, pain, and weakness in the shoulder, arm, and hand.
Radiation to the underarm lymph nodes might cause lymphedema, a type of pain and swelling in the arm or chest.
In rare cases, radiation therapy may weaken the ribs, which could lead to a fracture.
In the past, parts of the lungs and heart were more likely to get some radiation, which could lead to long-term damage of these organs in some women. Modern radiation therapy equipment focuses the radiation beams better than older machines, so these problems are rare today.
A very rare complication of radiation to the breast is the development of another cancer called an angiosarcoma.

Brachytherapy
Brachytherapy, also known as internal radiation, is another way to deliver radiation therapy. Instead of aiming radiation beams from outside the body, a device containing radioactive seeds or pellets is placed into the breast tissue for a short time in the area where the cancer had been removed (tumor bed).
For certain women who had breast-conserving surgery (BCS), brachytherapy can be used by itself (instead of radiation to the whole breast) as a form of accelerated partial breast irradiation. Tumor size, location, and other factors may limit who can get brachytherapy.
Types of brachytherapy
Intracavitary brachytherapy
This is the most common type of brachytherapy for women with breast cancer. A device is put into the space left from BCS and is left there until treatment is complete. There are several different devices available, most of which require surgical training for proper placement. They all go into the breast as a small catheter (tube). The end of the device inside the breast is then expanded like a balloon so that it stays securely in place for the entire treatment. The other end of the catheter sticks out of the breast. For each treatment, one or more sources of radiation (often pellets) are placed down through the tube and into the device for a short time and then removed. Treatments are typically given twice a day for 5 days in an outpatient setting. After the last treatment, the device is deflated and removed.
Interstitial brachytherapy
In this approach, several small, hollow tubes called catheters are inserted into the breast around the area where the cancer was removed and are left in place for several days. Radioactive pellets are inserted into the catheters for short periods of time each day and then removed. This method of brachytherapy has been around longer (and has more evidence to support it), but it is not used as much.
Early studies of intracavitary brachytherapy as the only radiation after BCS have had promising results as far as having at least equal cancer control compared with standard whole breast radiation, but may have more complications including poor cosmetic results. Studies of this treatment are being done and more follow-up is needed.   
Possible side effects of intracavitary brachytherapy
As with external beam radiation, intracavitary brachytherapy can have side effects, including:

Redness and/or bruising at the treatment site
Breast pain
Infection
Damage to fatty tissue in the breast
Weakness and fracture of the ribs in rare cases
Fluid collecting in the breast (seroma)Chemotherapy (chemo) uses anti-cancer drugs that may be given intravenously (injected into your vein) or by mouth. The drugs travel through the bloodstream to reach cancer cells in most parts of the body. Sometimes, if cancer spreads to the spinal fluid, which surrounds and cushions the brain and spinal cord, chemo may be given directly into in this area (called intrathecal chemotherapy).Some types of breast cancer are affected by hormones, like estrogen and progesterone. The breast cancer cells have receptors (proteins) that attach to estrogen and progesterone, which helps them grow. Treatments that stop these hormones from attaching to these receptors are called hormone or endocrine therapy.
Hormone therapy can reach cancer cells almost anywhere in the body and not just in the breast. It's recommended for women with tumors that are hormone receptor-positive. It does not help women whose tumors don't have hormone receptors (these tumors are called hormone receptor-negative).
When is hormone therapy used for breast cancer?
Hormone therapy is often used after surgery (as adjuvant therapy) to help reduce the risk of the cancer coming back. Sometimes it is started before surgery (as neoadjuvant therapy).
It is usually taken for at least 5 years. Treatment longer than 5 years might be offered to women whose cancers have a higher chance of coming back. A test called the Breast Cancer Index might be used to help decide if a woman will benefit from more than 5 years of hormone therapy.
Hormone therapy can also be used to treat cancer that has come back after treatment or that has spread to other parts of the body.
How does hormone therapy work?
About 2 out of 3 breast cancers are hormone receptor-positive. Their cells have receptors (proteins) for estrogen (ER-positive cancers) and/or progesterone (PR-positive cancers) which help the cancer cells grow and spread.
There are several types of hormone therapy for breast cancer. Most types of hormone therapy either lower estrogen levels in the body or stop estrogen from helping breast cancer cells grow.
Drugs that block estrogen receptors
These drugs work by stopping estrogen from fueling breast cancer cells to grow.
Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs)
These drugs block estrogen from connecting to the cancer cells and telling them to grow and divide. While they have anti-estrogen effects in breast cells, they act like an estrogen in other tissues, like the uterus and the bones.
These drugs are pills, taken by mouth.
Tamoxifen﻿
Tamoxifen can be used to treat women with breast cancer who have or have not gone through menopause.
This drug can be used in several ways:

In women at high risk of breast cancer, tamoxifen can be used to help lower the risk of developing breast cancer.
For women who have been treated with breast-conserving surgery for ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) that is hormone receptor-positive, taking tamoxifen for 5 years lowers the chance of the DCIS coming back in the same breast. It also lowers the chance of getting an invasive breast cancer or another DCIS in both breasts.
For women with hormone receptor-positive invasive breast cancer treated with surgery, tamoxifen can help lower the chances of the cancer coming back and improve the chances of living longer. It can also lower the risk of a new cancer developing in the other breast. Tamoxifen can be started either after surgery (adjuvant therapy) or before surgery (neoadjuvant therapy). When given after surgery, it is usually taken for 5 to 10 years. This drug is used mainly for women with early-stage breast cancer who have not yet gone through menopause. If you have gone through menopause, aromatase inhibitors (see below) are often used instead.
For women with hormone-positive breast cancer that has spread to other parts of the body, tamoxifen can often help slow or stop the growth of the cancer, and might even shrink some tumors.

Toremifene (Fareston)
Toremifene is a SERM that works in a similar way, but it is used less often and is only approved to treat post-menopausal women with metastatic breast cancer. It is not likely to work if tamoxifen has already been used and has stopped working.
Side effects of tamoxifen and toremifene
The most common side effects of tamoxifen and toremifene are:

Hot flashes
Vaginal dryness or discharge
Changes in the menstrual cycle

When tamoxifen treatment starts, a small number of women with cancer that has spread to the bones might have a tumor flare (the tumor gets bigger for a short time) which can cause bone pain. This usually goes away quickly, but rarely a woman may also develop a high calcium level in the blood that is hard to control. If this happens, the treatment may need to be stopped for a time.
Rare, but more serious side effects are also possible:

If a woman has gone through menopause, SERMs can increase her risk of developing endometrial cancer and uterine sarcoma. Tell your doctor right away about any unusual vaginal bleeding (a common symptom of this cancer). Most uterine bleeding is not from cancer, but this symptom always needs quick attention.
Blood clots are another uncommon, but serious side effect. They usually form in the legs (called deep vein thrombosis or DVT), but sometimes a piece of clot in the leg may break off and end up blocking an artery in the lungs (pulmonary embolism or PE). Call your doctor or nurse right away if you develop pain, redness, or swelling in your lower leg (calf), shortness of breath, or chest pain, because these can be symptoms of a DVT or PE. Rarely, tamoxifen has been associated with strokes in postmenopausal women, so tell your doctor if you have severe headaches, confusion, or trouble speaking or moving.
Eye problems such as cataracts can sometimes happen when taking tamoxifen. It is important to tell your doctor right away if you are having any new trouble with your eyesight.
Bones can be affected.  Depending on a woman's menopausal status, tamoxifen can have different effects on the bones. In pre-menopausal women, tamoxifen can cause some bone thinning, but in post-menopausal women it often strengthens bones to some degree. The benefits of taking these drugs outweigh the risks for almost all women with hormone receptor-positive breast cancer.

Selective estrogen receptor degraders (SERDs)
Like SERMs, these drugs attach to estrogen receptors. But SERDs bind to the receptors more tightly and cause them to be broken down. These drugs have anti-estrogen effects throughout the body.
SERDs are used most often in women who are past menopause. When given to pre-menopausal women, they need to be combined with a luteinizing-hormone releasing hormone (LHRH) agonist to turn off the ovaries (see Ovarian suppression below).
Fulvestrant (Faslodex)
Fulvestrant can be used:

Alone to treat advanced breast cancer that has not been treated with other hormone therapy.
Alone to treat advanced breast cancer after other hormone drugs (like tamoxifen and often an aromatase inhibitor) have stopped working.
In combination with a CDK 4/6 inhibitor or PI3K inhibitor to treat metastatic breast cancer as initial hormone therapy or after other hormone treatments have been tried.  

It is given as 2 injections into the buttocks (bottom). For the first month, the 2 shots are given 2 weeks apart. After that, they are given once a month.
Elacestrant (Orserdu)
This drug can be used to treat advanced, ER-positive, HER2-negative breast cancer when the cancer cells have an ESR1 gene mutation, and the cancer has grown after at least one other type of hormone therapy.
Elacestrant is taken daily as pills.
Side effects of fulvestrant and elacestrant
Common short-term side effects of these drugs can include:

Hot flashes and/or night sweats
Headache
Nausea
Feeling tired
Loss of appetite
Muscle, joint, or bone pain
Injection site pain

Elacestrant can also increase cholesterol and fat levels in the blood.
Drugs that lower estrogen levels
Because estrogen stimulates hormone receptor-positive breast cancers to grow, lowering the estrogen level can help slow the cancer’s growth or help prevent it from coming back.
Aromatase inhibitors (AIs)
Aromatase inhibitors (AIs) are drugs that stop most estrogen production in the body. Before menopause, most estrogen is made by the ovaries. But in women whose ovaries aren’t working, either because they have gone through menopause or because of certain treatments, estrogen is still made in body fat by an enzyme called aromatase. AIs work by preventing aromatase from making estrogen.
These drugs are useful for women who have gone through menopause, although they can also be used in pre-menopausal women when they are combined with ovarian suppression (see below).
These AIs are pills taken every day to treat breast cancer:

Letrozole (Femara)
Anastrozole (Arimidex)
Exemestane (Aromasin)

Possible side effects of AIs
The most common side effects of AIs are:

Hot flashes
Vaginal dryness
Bone and joint pain
Muscle pain

AIs tend to have side effects different from tamoxifen. They don't cause uterine cancers and very rarely cause blood clots. They can, however, cause muscle pain and joint stiffness and/or pain. The joint pain may be similar to a feeling of having arthritis in many different joints at one time. Options for treating this side effect include, stopping the AI and then switching to a different AI, taking a medicine called duloxetine (Cymbalta), or routine exercise with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).  But the muscle and joint pain has led some women to stop treatment. If this happens, most doctors recommend using tamoxifen to complete 5 to 10 years of hormone treatment.
Because AIs drastically lower the estrogen level in women after menopause, they can also cause bone thinning, sometimes leading to osteoporosis and even fractures. If you are taking an AI, your bone density may be tested regularly and you may also be given bisphosphonates (zoledronic acid [Zometa] for example) or denosumab (Xgeva, Prolia), to strengthen your bones.
Ovarian suppression
For pre-menopausal women, removing or shutting down the ovaries (ovarian suppression), which are the main source of estrogen, is effectively making them post-menopausal. This may allow some other hormone therapies, such as AIs, to be used. Ovarian suppression along with tamoxifen or an AI might be recommended for women whose breast cancer is at high risk of coming back.  
There are several ways to remove or shut down the ovaries to treat breast cancer:

Oophorectomy: Surgery to remove the ovaries. This is permanent and is also called ovarian ablation.
Luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonists: These drugs, also called LHRH analogs, are used more often than oophorectomy. They stop the signal that the body sends to the ovaries to make estrogen, which causes temporary menopause. Common LHRH drugs include goserelin (Zoladex) and leuprolide (Lupron). They can be used alone or with other hormone drugs (tamoxifen, aromatase inhibitors, fulvestrant) as hormone therapy in pre-menopausal women.
Chemotherapy drugs: Some chemo drugs can damage the ovaries of pre-menopausal women so they no longer make estrogen. Ovarian function can return months or years later in some women, but in others the damage to the ovaries is permanent and leads to menopause.

All of these methods can cause symptoms of menopause, including hot flashes, night sweats, vaginal dryness, and mood swings.
Hormone therapy after surgery for breast cancer
 After surgery, hormone therapy can be given to reduce the risk of the cancer coming back. Taking an AI, either alone or after tamoxifen, has been shown to work better than taking just tamoxifen for 5 years.
These hormone therapy schedules are known to be helpful for women who are post-menopausal when diagnosed:

Tamoxifen for 2 to 3 years, followed by an AI for 2 to 3 years (5 years total of treatment)
Tamoxifen for 2 to 3 years, followed by an AI for 5 years (7 to 8 years of treatment)
Tamoxifen for 4½ to 6 years, followed by an AI for 5 years (9½ to 11 years of treatment)
Tamoxifen for 5 to 10 years
An AI for 5 to 10 years
An AI for 2 to 3 years, followed by tamoxifen for 2 to 3 years (5 years total of treatment)
For women who are unable to take an AI, tamoxifen for 5 to 10 years is an option

For most post-menopausal women whose cancers are hormone receptor-positive, most doctors recommend taking an AI at some point during adjuvant (after surgery) therapy. Standard treatment is to take these drugs for about 5 years, or to take in sequence with tamoxifen for 5 to 10 years. For women at a higher risk of recurrence, hormone treatment for longer than 5 years may be recommended. Tamoxifen is an option for some women who cannot take an AI. Taking tamoxifen for 10 years is considered more effective than taking it for 5 years, but you and your doctor will decide the best schedule of treatment for you.
These therapy schedules are known to be helpful for women who are pre-menopausal when diagnosed﻿:

Tamoxifen (with or without ovarian suppression) for 5 to 10 years.
Tamoxifen (with or without ovarian suppression) for 5 years followed by an AI for 5 years if you have gone through menopause.
An AI plus some sort of ovarian suppression (see above) for 5 to 10 years.

If you have early-stage breast cancer and had not gone through menopause when you were first diagnosed, your doctor might recommend taking tamoxifen first, and then taking an AI later if you go through menopause during treatment. Another option is ovarian suppression by getting a drug called a luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) agonist, which turns off the ovaries, along with an AI. Pre-menopausal women should not take an AI alone for breast cancer treatment because it is unsafe and can increase hormone levels.
If cancer comes back or has spread
Tamoxifen, AIs, elacestrant, and fulvestrant can be used to treat more advanced hormone-positive breast cancers, especially in post-menopausal women. They are often continued for as long as they are helpful. Pre-menopausal women might be offered tamoxifen alone or an AI in combination with an LHRH agonist for advanced disease.
Less common types of hormone therapy
Some other types of hormone therapy that were used more often in the past, but are rarely given now include:

Megestrol acetate (Megace), a progesterone-like drug
Androgens (male hormones), like testosterone
Estradiol (a form of estrogen)

These might be options if other forms of hormone therapy are no longer working, but they can often cause side effects.Targeted drug therapy uses medicines that are directed at (target) proteins on breast cancer cells that help them grow, spread, and live longer. Targeted drugs work to destroy cancer cells or slow down their growth. They have side effects different from chemotherapy.
Some targeted therapy drugs, for example, monoclonal antibodies, work in more than one way to control cancer cells and may also be considered immunotherapy because they boost the immune system.
Like chemotherapy, these drugs enter the bloodstream and reach almost all areas of the body, which makes them useful against cancers that have spread to distant parts of the body. Targeted drugs sometimes work even when chemo drugs do not. Some targeted drugs can help other types of treatment work better.
Several types of targeted therapy drugs can be used to treat breast cancer.Immunotherapy is the use of medicines to boost a person’s own immune system to recognize and destroy cancer cells more effectively. Immunotherapy typically works on specific proteins involved in the immune system to enhance the immune response. These drugs have side effects different from those of chemotherapy.
Some immunotherapy drugs, for example, monoclonal antibodies, work in more than one way to control cancer cells and may also be considered targeted therapy because they block a specific protein on the cancer cell to keep it from growing.
Immunotherapy is used to treat some types of breast cancer.
Immune checkpoint inhibitors for breast cancer
An important part of the immune system is its ability to keep itself from attacking normal cells in the body. To do this, it uses proteins (or "checkpoints") on immune cells that need to be turned on (or off) to start an immune response. Breast cancer cells sometimes use these checkpoints to avoid being attacked by the immune system. Drugs that target these checkpoint proteins, help restore the immune response against breast cancer cells.
PD-1 inhibitor
Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) for breast cancer  
Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) is a drug that targets PD-1 (a protein on immune system T cells that normally helps keep them from attacking other cells in the body). By blocking PD-1, these drugs boost the immune response against breast cancer cells. This can often shrink tumors.
It can be used with chemotherapy to treat triple-negative breast cancer:

Before and after surgery for stage 2 or 3 cancers
That ﻿has come back (recurred) locally but can’t be removed by surgery  
That has spread to other parts of the body.

This drug is given as an intravenous (IV) infusion, typically every 3 or 6 weeks. In certain situations, your doctor might test your cancer cells for the PD-L1 protein to show that the cancer is more likely to respond to treatment with pembrolizumab. 
Possible side effects of immune checkpoint inhibitors
Side effects of these drugs can include fatigue, cough, nausea, skin rash, poor appetite, constipation, and diarrhea.
Other, more serious side effects occur less often.
Infusion reactions:  Some people might have an infusion reaction while getting these drugs. This is like an allergic reaction, and can include fever, chills, flushing of the face, rash, itchy skin, feeling dizzy, wheezing, and trouble breathing. It’s important to tell your doctor or nurse right away if you have any of these symptoms while getting these drugs.
Autoimmune reactions: These drugs remove one of the protections on the body's immune system. Sometimes the immune system starts attacking other parts of the body, which can cause serious or even life-threatening problems in the lungs, intestines, liver, hormone-making glands, kidneys, or other organs.
It’s very important to report any new side effects to your health care team quickly. If serious side effects do occur, treatment may need to be stopped and you may get high doses of corticosteroids to suppress your immune system.This information is based on AJCC Staging systems prior to 2018 which were primarily based on tumor size and lymph node status. Since the updated staging system for breast cancer now also includes estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and HER2 status, the stages may be higher or lower than previous staging systems. Whether or not treatment strategies will change with this new staging system are yet to be determined. You should discuss your stage and treatment options with your doctor. 
The stage of your breast cancer is an important factor in making decisions about your treatment options. In general, the more the breast cancer has spread, the more treatment you will likely need. But other factors can also be important, such as:

If the cancer cells have hormone receptors (that is, if the cancer is ER-positive or PR-positive)
If the cancer cells have large amounts of the HER2 protein (that is, if the cancer is HER2-positive)
If the cancer cells have a certain gene mutation (change)
Your overall health and personal preferences
If you have gone through menopause or not
How fast the cancer is growing (measured by grade or other measures) and if it is affecting major organs like the lungs or liver

Talk with your doctor about how these factors can affect your treatment options.Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) doesn’t have estrogen or progesterone receptors and also makes too little or none of the HER2 protein. Because the cancer cells don't have these proteins, hormone therapy and drugs that target HER2 are not helpful, so chemotherapy (chemo) is the main systemic treatment option. And even though TNBC tends to respond well to chemo initially, it also tends to come back (recur) more frequently than other breast cancers.
Stages I-III triple-negative breast cancer
Surgery first: If the early-stage TNBC tumor is small enough to be removed by surgery, then breast-conserving surgery or a mastectomy with a check of the lymph nodes may be done In certain cases, such as with a large tumor or if the lymph nodes are found to have cancer, radiation may follow surgery. You might also be given chemo after surgery (adjuvant chemotherapy) to reduce the chances of the cancer coming back. For women who have a BRCA mutation and at surgery are found to have:

A tumor larger than 2cm but no bigger than 5cm OR
1 to 3 axillary (underarm) lymph nodes with cancer

the targeted drug olaparib (Lynparza) might be given for a year after adjuvant chemo.  When given this way, it can help some women live longer.
Surgery second: Chemo is often given before surgery (neoadjuvant chemotherapy) by itself or with pembrolizumab (Keytruda) to shrink a large tumor and/or lymph nodes with cancer. If cancer is still found in the tissue removed by surgery after neoadjuvant chemo has been given, your doctor may recommend:

an oral chemo drug called capecitabine (Xeloda) for 18 to 24 weeks. This might help some women live longer.  
more pembrolizumab after surgery (adjuvant treatment) to reduce the chances of the cancer coming back.
the targeted drug olaparib for one year for women who have a BRCA mutation to help lower the chance of the cancer recurring. When given this way, it can help some women live longer.  

Stage IV triple-negative breast cancer
Chemo is often used first when the cancer has spread to other parts of the body (stage IV). Common chemo drugs used include anthracyclines, taxanes, capecitabine, gemcitabine, eribulin, and others. Chemo drugs might be used alone or in combination.  
For women with TNBC who have a BRCA mutation  and whose cancer no longer responds to common breast cancer chemo drugs, other platinum chemo drugs (like cisplatin or carboplatin) or targeted drugs called PARP inhibitors (such as olaparib [Lynparza] or talazoparib [Talzenna]), may be considered.
For advanced TNBC in which the cancer cells have the PD-L1 protein, the first treatment may be immunotherapy (pembrolizumab) plus chemo . The PD-L1 protein is found in about 1 out of 5 TNBCs.
For advanced TNBC in which at least 2 other drug treatments have already been tried, the antibody-drug conjugate sacituzumab govitecan (Trodelvy) might be an option.
For advanced TNBC in which the cancer cells show high levels of gene changes called microsatellite instability (MSI) or changes in any of the mismatch repair (MMR) genes (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2), immunotherapy with the drug pembrolizumab might be used. Pembrolizumab might also be an option for TNBC that has a high tumor mutational burden (TMB-H) which is a measure of the number of gene mutations (changes) inside the cancer cells. Cells that have many gene mutations (a high TMB) might be more likely to be recognized as abnormal and attacked by the body’s immune system.
Surgery and radiation may also be options in certain situations. 
See Treatment of Stage IV (Metastatic) Breast Cancer for more information.
Recurrent triple-negative breast cancer
If TNBC comes back (recurs) locally, cannot be removed with surgery, and makes the PD-L1 protein, immunotherapy with the drug pembrolizumab along with chemotherapy is an option. Other treatments might be options as well, depending on the situation.
If the cancer recurs in other parts of the body, options might include chemotherapy or the antibody-drug conjugate sacituzumab govitecan (Trodelvy).
Regardless of the stage of the cancer, participation in a clinical trial of new treatments for TNBC is also a good option because TNBC is uncommon and tends to have a poor prognosis (outcome) compared to other types of breast cancer, and because these studies often allow patients to have access to drugs not available for standard treatment.Inflammatory breast cancer (IBC) is an uncommon type of invasive breast cancer that typically makes the skin on the breast look red and feel warm. It also may give the breast skin a thick, pitted appearance that looks a lot like an orange peel. These changes are caused by cancer cells blocking lymph vessels in the skin.
Because inflammatory breast cancer has reached these lymph vessels and has caused changes in the skin, it is considered to be at least a stage III breast cancer when it is diagnosed. IBC that has spread to other parts of the body is considered stage IV. These cancers typically grow quickly and can be challenging to treat.
Regardless of the stage of the cancer, participation in a clinical trial of new treatments for IBC is also a good option because IBC is rare, has a poor prognosis (outcome), and these studies often allow access to drugs not available for standard treatment.
Treating stage III inflammatory breast cancer
IBC that has not spread outside the breast or to nearby lymph nodes is stage III. Treatment usually starts with chemotherapy (chemo) to try to shrink the tumor. If the cancer is HER2-positive, targeted therapy is given along with the chemo. This is typically followed by surgery (mastectomy and lymph node dissection) to remove the cancer. Radiation therapy often follows surgery. Sometimes, more chemo may be given after surgery but before radiation. If the cancer is hormone receptor-positive , hormone therapy is given as well (usually after all chemo has been given). Combining these treatments has improved survival significantly over the years.
Chemotherapy (possibly along with targeted therapy)
Using chemo before surgery is called neoadjuvant or preoperative treatment. Most women with IBC will receive two types of chemo drugs (although not always at the same time):

An anthracycline, such as doxorubicin (Adriamycin) or epirubicin (Ellence)
A taxane, such as paclitaxel (Taxol) or docetaxel (Taxotere)

Other chemo drugs may be used as well.
If the cancer is HER2-positive (the cancer cells make too much of a protein called HER2), the targeted therapy drug trastuzumab (Herceptin) is usually given, sometimes along with another targeted drug, pertuzumab (Perjeta). These drugs can lead to heart problems when given with an anthracycline, so one option is to give the anthracycline first (without trastuzumab or pertuzumab), followed by treatment with a taxane and trastuzumab (with or without pertuzumab).
For IBC that is triple-negative, the immunotherapy drug pembrolizumab can be given with chemo before surgery (neoadjuvant treatment) and then continued by itself after surgery (adjuvant treatment).
For women who have:

a BRCA mutation AND
triple-negative or HER2-negative IBC AND
residual cancer in the tissue removed by surgery after neoadjuvant chemo

the targeted drug olaparib (Lynparza) might be given to lower the risk of the cancer recurring. It is typically given for one year. When given this way, olaparib can help some women live longer.
Surgery and further treatments
If the cancer improves with chemo, surgery is typically the next step. The standard operation is a modified radical mastectomy, where the entire breast and the lymph nodes under the arm are removed. Because IBC affects so much of the breast and skin, breast-conserving surgery (partial mastectomy or lumpectomy) and skin-sparing mastectomy are not options. It isn’t clear that sentinel lymph node biopsy (where only one or a few nodes are removed) is reliable in IBC, so it is also not an option.
If the cancer does not respond to chemo (and the breast is still very swollen and red), surgery cannot be done. Either other chemo drugs will be tried, or the breast may be treated with radiation. Then if the cancer responds (the breast shrinks and is no longer red), surgery may be an option.
If breast radiation isn’t given before surgery, it is given after surgery, even if no cancer is thought to remain. This is called adjuvant radiation. It lowers the chance that the cancer will come back. Radiation is usually given 5 days a week for 6 weeks, but in some cases a more intense treatment (twice a day) can be used instead. Depending on how much tumor was found in the breast after surgery, radiation might be delayed until further chemo and/or targeted therapy (such as trastuzumab) is given. If breast reconstruction is to be done, it is usually delayed until after the radiation therapy that most often follows surgery.
Treatment after surgery often includes additional (adjuvant) systemic treatment. This can include chemo, targeted therapy, hormone therapy (tamoxifen or an aromatase inhibitor) if the cancer cells have hormone receptors, the oral chemo drug capecitabine (Xeloda) if the cancer is triple-negative, the PARP inhibitor olaparib (Lynparza) if the woman has a BRCA mutation,and/or trastuzumab, pertuzumab or ado-trastuzumab emtansine if the cancer is HER2-positive.
Treating stage IV inflammatory breast cancer
Patients with metastatic (stage IV) IBC are treated with systemic therapy. This may include:

Chemotherapy
Hormonal therapy (if the cancer is hormone receptor-positive)
Targeted therapy with a drug that targets HER2 (if the cancer is HER2-positive)
Immunotherapy if the cancer makes a protein called PD-L1
Targeted drug therapy with a PARP inhibitor called olaparib if the woman has a BRCA mutation

One or more of these treatments might be used. Many times, a targeted drug is given along with chemotherapy or with hormone therapy. Surgery and radiation may also be options in certain situations. See Treatment of Stage IV (Metastatic) Breast Cancer for more information.If you are diagnosed with breast cancer while pregnant, your treatment options will be more complicated because you will want to get the best treatment for your cancer while also protecting the baby. The type and timing of treatment will need to be planned ​carefully and coordinated between your cancer care team and your obstetrician.
When treating a pregnant woman with breast cancer, the goal is the same as when treating a non-pregnant woman: to cure the cancer whenever possible, or to control it and keep it from spreading if it can’t be cured. But the extra concern of protecting a growing fetus may make treatment more complicated.
Is it safe to have breast cancer treatment during pregnancy?
If you are pregnant and have breast cancer, you might have hard choices to make, so get expert help and be sure you know all your options. Pregnant women can safely get treatment for breast cancer, although the types of treatment used and the timing of treatment might be affected by the pregnancy. If you are pregnant and have been diagnosed with breast cancer, your treatment recommendations will depend on:

The size of the tumor
Where the tumor is located
If the cancer has spread and if so, how far
How far along you are in the pregnancy
Your overall health
Your personal preferences

It is generally safe to have surgery for breast cancer while you’re pregnant. Chemotherapy seems to be safe for the baby if given in the second or third trimester of pregnancy, but it isn’t safe in the first trimester. Other breast cancer treatments, such as hormone therapy, targeted therapy, and radiation therapy, are more likely to harm the baby and are not usually given during pregnancy.
Treatment choices can become complicated if there is a conflict between the best known treatment for the mother and the well-being of the baby. For example, if a woman is found to have breast cancer early in her pregnancy and needs chemotherapy right away, she may be advised to think about ending the pregnancy. A counselor or psychologist should also be part of your health care team to help give you the emotional support you may need.
Some older studies found that ending a pregnancy in order to have cancer treatment didn’t improve a woman’s prognosis (outlook). Even though there were flaws in these studies, ending the pregnancy is no longer routinely recommended when breast cancer is found.  Still, this option may be discussed when looking at all the treatment choices available, especially for metastatic (stage IV) or aggressive cancers that may need treatment right away, such as inflammatory breast cancer.
Breast cancer surgery during pregnancy
Surgery to remove the cancer in the breast and nearby lymph nodes is a major part of treatment for any woman with early breast cancer, and generally is safe in pregnancy.
Options for breast cancer surgery might include:

Removing the entire breast (mastectomy)
Removing just the part containing the cancer  (lumpectomy or breast-conserving surgery [BCS])

The type of surgery a woman might have depends on the extent of her cancer and when the cancer is diagnosed during the pregnancy.
Checking lymph nodes for cancer spread
In addition to removing the tumor in the breast, one or more lymph nodes in the underarm area (axillary lymph nodes) also need to be removed to check if the cancer has spread. One way to do this is an axillary lymph node dissection (ALND). This is often the standard procedure for pregnant women with breast cancer and removes many of the lymph nodes under the arm. Another procedure, called a sentinel lymph node biopsy (SLNB), might be an option depending on how far along you are in pregnancy and your cancer stage. SLNB allows the doctor to remove fewer nodes, but there are concerns about the effects the SLNB dye might have on the baby. Because of these concerns, most experts recommend that SLNB only be used in certain situations such as later in pregnancy, and that the blue dye not be used during the procedure.
Is anesthesia safe during pregnancy?
Surgery for breast cancer generally carries little risk to the baby. But there are certain times in pregnancy when anesthesia (the drugs used to make you sleep for surgery) may be risky for the baby.
Your surgeon and anesthesiologist, along with a high-risk obstetrician (OB), will need to work together to decide the best time during pregnancy to operate. If the surgery is done later in the pregnancy, your obstetrician may be there just in case there are any problems with the baby during surgery. Together, your doctors will decide which anesthesia drugs and techniques are the safest for both you and the baby.
Treatment after surgery
Depending on the cancer’s stage, you may need more treatment such as chemotherapy, radiation therapy, hormone therapy, and/or targeted therapy after surgery to help lower the risk of the cancer coming back. This is called adjuvant treatment. In some cases, this treatment can be put off until after delivery.
Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy (chemo) may be used after surgery (as adjuvant treatment) for some earlier stages of breast cancer. It also can be used by itself for more advanced cancers.
Chemo is not given during the first 3 months (first trimester) of pregnancy. Because a lot of the baby’s development occurs during this time, the safety of chemo hasn’t been studied in the first trimester. The risk of miscarriage (losing the baby) is also the greatest during this time.
For many years, it was thought that all chemo would harm an unborn baby no matter when it was given. But studies have shown that certain chemo drugs (such as doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, fluorouracil, and the taxanes) used during the second and third trimesters (months 4 through 9 of pregnancy) don’t raise the risk of birth defects, stillbirths, or health problems shortly after birth, though they may increase the risk of early delivery. Researchers still don’t know if these children will have any long-term effects.
If you have early breast cancer and you need chemo after surgery (adjuvant chemo), it will usually be delayed until at least your second trimester. If you are already in the third trimester when the cancer is found, chemo may be delayed until after birth. The birth may be induced (brought on) a few weeks early in some women. These same treatment plans may also be used for women with more advanced cancer.
Chemo is generally not recommended after 35 weeks of pregnancy or within 3 weeks of delivery because it can lower the mother’s blood cell counts. This could cause bleeding and increase the chances of infection during birth. Holding off on chemo for the last few weeks before delivery allows the mother’s blood counts to return to normal before childbirth.
Treatments that typically are on hold until after delivery
Some treatments for breast cancer can harm the baby and are not safe during pregnancy. If these treatments are needed, they are usually scheduled after the baby is born.
Radiation therapy: Radiation therapy to the breast is often used after breast-conserving surgery (lumpectomy) to help reduce the risk of the cancer coming back. The high doses of radiation used for this can harm the baby any time during pregnancy. This may cause miscarriage, birth defects, slow fetal growth, or a higher risk of childhood cancer. Because of this, doctors don’t use radiation treatment during pregnancy.
For some women whose cancer is found later in the pregnancy, it may be possible to have a lumpectomy during pregnancy and then wait until after the baby is born to get radiation therapy. But this treatment approach has not been well-studied. Waiting too long to start radiation can increase the chance of the cancer coming back.
Hormone therapy: Hormone therapy is often used as treatment after surgery or as treatment for advanced breast cancer in women with hormone receptor-positive (estrogen or progesterone) breast cancer. Hormone therapy drugs used for breast cancer include tamoxifen, anastrozole, letrozole, and exemestane.
Hormone therapy should not be given during pregnancy because it can affect the baby. It should be delayed until after the woman has given birth.
Targeted therapy: Drugs that target HER2, such as trastuzumab (Herceptin), pertuzumab (Perjeta), ado-trastuzumab emtansine (Kadcyla) and lapatinib (Tykerb), are important in treating HER2-positive breast cancers. In women who aren’t pregnant, trastuzumab is used as a part of treatment after surgery, pertuzumab can be used with trastuzumab before surgery, and all of these drugs can be useful in treating advanced cancer. But based on studies of women who were treated during pregnancy, none of these drugs are considered safe for the baby if taken during pregnancy.
Everolimus (Afinitor) and palbociclib (Ibrance) are also targeted drugs that can be used with hormone therapy to treat advanced breast cancer. Again, these and other targeted drugs are thought to be unsafe to use during pregnancy.
Can I breastfeed during cancer treatment?
Most doctors recommend that women who have just had babies and are about to be treated for breast cancer should stop (or not start) breastfeeding. Many chemo, hormone, and targeted therapy drugs can enter breast milk and be passed on to the baby. Breastfeeding isn't recommended if you are being treated with systemic drugs and sometimes shouldn't be restarted for months after treatment has ended, Sometimes, if a woman has hormone-positive breast cancer, she might be given drugs to stop the production of breast milk.
If breast surgery is planned, stopping breastfeeding will help reduce blood flow to the breasts and make them smaller. This can help with the operation. It also helps reduce the risk of infection in the breast and can help avoid breast milk collecting in biopsy or surgery areas.
If you have questions, such as when it might be safe to start breastfeeding, talk with your health care team. If you plan to start breastfeeding after you’ve stopped for a while, plan ahead. Breastfeeding (lactation) experts can give you extra help if you need it.
Does pregnancy affect survival rates for breast cancer?
Pregnancy can make it harder to find, diagnose, and treat breast cancer. Most studies have found that the outcomes among pregnant and non-pregnant women with breast cancer are about the same for cancers found at the same stage.
Some doctors believe that ending the pregnancy may help slow the course of more advanced breast cancers, and they may recommend that for some women with advanced breast cancer. It’s hard to do research in this area, and good, unbiased studies don’t exist. Ending the pregnancy makes treatment simpler, but so far no evidence shows that ending the pregnancy improves a woman’s overall survival or cancer outcome.
Studies have not shown that the treatment delays that are sometimes needed during pregnancy have an effect on breast cancer outcome, either. But this, too, has proven to be a difficult area to study. Finally, there are no reports showing that breast cancer itself can harm the baby.Many women are relieved to be finished with breast cancer treatment, but also worry about the cancer coming back and can feel lost when they don't see their cancer care team as often.
But for some women with advanced breast cancer, the cancer may never go away completely. These women may continue to get treatments to help keep the breast cancer under control and to help relieve symptoms from it. Learning to live with advanced breast cancer that doesn’t go away can have its own types of stress and uncertainty.
Even if you have completed breast cancer treatment, your doctors still will want to watch you closely, so it’s very important for you to go to all of your follow-up appointments. During these visits, your doctors will ask if you are having any problems and will examine you. Lab tests and imaging tests typically aren't needed after treatment for most early-stage breast cancers. But they might be done in some women who are having symptoms to see if they're the result of the cancer returning or are from treatment-related side effects.
Almost any cancer treatment can have side effects. Some might only last for a few days or weeks, but others might last a long time. Some side effects might not even show up until years after you have finished treatment. Your doctor visits are a good time for you to ask questions and talk about any changes or problems you notice or concerns you have. However, if concerns about your cancer come up between visits, you shouldn't wait until your next scheduled visit. Call your doctor's office right away.
Typical follow-up schedules
Your follow-up schedule can depend on many factors, including the type of breast cancer, how advanced it was when it was found (the stage of the cancer), and how it was (or is being) treated.

Doctor visits: If you have finished treatment, your follow-up visits will probably be every few months at first. The longer you have been free of cancer, the less often the appointments are needed. After 5 years, they are typically done about once a year.
Mammograms: If you had breast-conserving surgery (lumpectomy or partial mastectomy), you will probably have a mammogram about 6 to 12 months after surgery and radiation are completed, and then at least every year after that. Women who've had a mastectomy (removal of the entire breast) typically no longer need mammograms on that side. But unless you've had both breasts removed, you still need to have yearly mammograms on the remaining breast. To learn more, see Mammograms After Breast Cancer Surgery.
Pelvic exams: If you are taking either of the hormone drugs tamoxifen or toremifene and still have your uterus, your doctor will likely recommend pelvic exams every year because these drugs can increase your risk of uterine (endometrial) cancer. This risk is highest in women who have gone through menopause. Be sure to tell your doctor right away about any unusual vaginal bleeding, such as bleeding or spotting after menopause, bleeding or spotting between periods, or a change in your periods. Although this is usually caused by something that isn’t cancer, it can also be the first sign of uterine cancer.
Bone density tests: If you are taking a hormone drug called an aromatase inhibitor (such as anastrozole, letrozole, or exemestane) for early-stage breast cancer, or if treatment puts you into menopause, your doctor will want to monitor your bone health and may consider testing your bone density.
Other tests: Other tests such as blood tests and imaging tests (like bone scans, x-rays, or CT or PET scans) are not a standard part of follow-up for most women who've been treated for breast cancer, because they haven't been shown to help them live longer. But one or more of these tests might be done if you have symptoms or physical exam findings that suggest that the cancer might have come back.

If symptoms, exams, or tests suggest your cancer might have returned, imaging tests such as an x-ray, CT scan, PET scan, MRI scan, bone scan, and/or a biopsy may be done.
If the cancer recurrence is confirmed, your doctor may also check your blood for circulating tumor cells (CTCs), or for levels of blood tumor markers such as CA-15-3, CA 27-29, or CEA. Tumor marker levels go up in some women if their cancer recurs or has spread, so if a tumor marker level is high, your doctor might use it to monitor the results of further treatment. But tumor marker levels don’t go up in all women, so these tests aren't always helpful, and they aren't used to watch for cancer recurrence in women without any symptoms.
Ask your doctor for a survivorship care plan
Talk with your doctor about developing a survivorship care plan for you. This plan might include:

A summary of your diagnosis, the tests that were done, and the treatment you received
A ﻿suggested schedule for follow-up exams and tests
A schedule for other tests you might need in the future, such as early detection (screening) tests for other types of cancer, or tests to look for long-term health effects from the breast cancer or its treatment
A list of possible late- or long-term side effects from your treatment, including what to watch for and when you should contact your doctor
Diet, physical activity, and other lifestyle modification suggestions

Keeping health insurance and copies of your medical records
Even after treatment is finished, it’s very important to keep your health insurance. Tests and doctor visits cost a lot, and even though no one wants to think their cancer might come back, this could happen.
At some point after your treatment, you might find yourself seeing a new doctor who doesn’t know about your medical history. It’s important to keep copies of your medical records so you can give your new doctor the details of your diagnosis and treatment. Learn more in Keeping Copies of Important Medical Records.
If the cancer comes back
If cancer does return, your treatment options will depend on where it comes back, what treatments you've had before, and your current health and preferences. For more information, see Treatment of Recurrent Breast Cancer. 
It’s important to know that women who have had breast cancer can also still get other types of cancer, so it’s important to follow the American Cancer Society guidelines for the early detection of cancer, such as those for colorectal cancer and cervical cancer.
Women who have had breast cancer are actually at higher risk for certain other cancers. To learn more about the risks of second cancers, see Second Cancers After Breast Cancer.If you have (or have had) breast cancer, you probably want to know if there are things you can do (aside from your treatment) that might lower your risk of the cancer growing or coming back, such as getting or staying active, eating a certain type of diet, or taking nutritional supplements. Fortunately, breast cancer is one of the best studied types of cancer in this regard, and research has shown there are some things you can do that might be helpful.
Staying as healthy as possible is more important than ever after breast cancer treatment. Controlling your weight, being physically active, and eating well may help you lower your risk of breast cancer coming back, as well as help protect you from other health problems.
Getting to a healthy weight
If you have had breast cancer, getting to and staying at a healthy weight might help lower your risk. A lot of research suggests that being overweight or obese (very overweight) raises the risk of breast cancer coming back. It has also been linked with a higher risk of getting lymphedema, as well as a higher risk of dying from breast cancer.
However, there is less research to show whether losing weight during or after treatment can actually lower the risk of breast cancer coming back. Large studies are now looking at this issue. This is complicated by the fact that many women gain weight (without trying) during breast cancer treatment, which itself might increase risk.
Of course, for women who are overweight, getting to a healthy weight can also have other health benefits. For example, weight loss has been shown to improve quality of life and physical functioning among overweight breast cancer survivors. Getting to a healthy weight might also lower your risk of getting some other cancers (including a new breast cancer), as well as some types of chronic diseases.
Because of the possible health benefits of losing weight, many health care providers now encourage women who are overweight to get to and stay at a healthy weight. Even losing a few pounds may be helpful. Still, it’s important to discuss this with your doctor before trying to lose weight, especially if you are still getting treatment or have just finished it. Your health care team can help you create a plan to lose weight safely.
Being physically active
Among breast cancer survivors, studies have found a consistent link between physical activity and a lower risk of breast cancer coming back and of dying from breast cancer, as well as dying of any cause. Physical activity has also been linked to improvements in quality of life, physical functioning, and fewer fatigue symptoms.
It’s not clear exactly how much activity might be needed, but more seems to be better. More vigorous activity may also be more helpful than less vigorous activity. But further studies are needed to help clarify this.
In the past, breast cancer survivors with lymphedema were often advised to avoid certain arm exercises and vigorous activities. But studies have found that such physical activity is safe when done the right way. In fact, it might actually lower the risk of lymphedema, or improve lymphedema for women who already have it.
As with other types of lifestyle changes, it’s important to talk with your treatment team before starting a new physical activity program. This will likely include meeting with a physical therapist as well. Your team can help you plan a safe and effective program.
Eating a healthy diet
Most research on possible links between diet and the risk of breast cancer coming back has looked at broad dietary patterns, rather than specific foods. In general, it’s not clear if eating any specific type of diet can help lower your risk of breast cancer coming back.
Studies have found that breast cancer survivors whose eating patterns include more vegetables, fruits, whole grains, chicken, and fish tend to live longer than those who eat more refined sugars, fats, red meats (such as beef, pork, and lamb), and processed meats (such as bacon, sausage, luncheon meats, and hot dogs). But it’s not clear if this is due to effects on breast cancer or possibly to other health benefits of eating a healthy diet.
Two large studies (known as WINS and WHEL) have looked at the effects of lowering fat intake after being diagnosed with early-stage breast cancer. One study found that women on a low-fat diet had a small reduction in the risk of cancer coming back, but these women also lost weight as a result of their diet, which might have affected the results. The other study did not find a link between a diet low in fat and the risk of cancer coming back.
Many women have questions about whether soy products are safe to eat after a diagnosis of breast cancer. Soy foods are rich sources of compounds called isoflavones that can have estrogen-like properties in the body. Some studies have suggested that soy food intake might lower the risk of breast cancer coming back, although more research is needed to confirm this. While eating soy foods doesn’t seem to pose a risk, the evidence regarding the effects of taking soy or isoflavone supplements, which often contain much higher levels of these compounds, is not as clear.
The links between specific types of diets and breast cancer coming back are not certain, but there are clearly health benefits to eating well. For example, diets that are rich in plant sources are often an important part of getting to and staying at a healthy weight. Eating a healthy diet can also help lower your risk for some other common health problems, such as heart disease and diabetes.
Dietary supplements
Women often want to know if there are any dietary or nutritional supplements they can take to help lower their risk. So far, no dietary supplements (including vitamins, minerals, and herbal products) have been shown to clearly help lower the risk of breast cancer progressing or coming back. This doesn’t mean that there aren't any that will help, but it’s important to know that none have been proven to do so.
Dietary supplements are not regulated like medicines in the United States – they do not have to be proven effective (or even safe) before being sold, although there are limits on what their makers are allowed to claim they can do. If you're thinking about taking any nutritional supplement, talk to your health care team. They can help you decide which ones you can use safely while avoiding those that might be harmful.
Alcohol
It’s clear that alcohol – even as little as a few drinks a week – increases a woman’s risk of developing breast cancer. But whether alcohol affects the risk of breast cancer coming back is not as clear. Drinking alcohol can raise the levels of estrogen in the body, which in theory could increase the risk of breast cancer coming back. But there is no strong evidence from studies to support this.
It is best not to drink alcohol. Women who do drink should limit it to no more than 1 drink a day to help lower their risk of getting certain types of cancer (including breast cancer). For women who have completed cancer treatment, the effects of alcohol on cancer recurrence risk are largely unknown.
Because this issue is complex, it’s important to discuss it with your health care team, taking into account your risk of breast cancer coming back (or you getting other cancers) and your risk of other health issues linked to alcohol use.
If the cancer comes back
If breast cancer does return, your treatment options will depend on where it comes back, what treatments you've had before, and your current health and preferences. For more information, see Treatment of Recurrent Breast Cancer.Learning to be comfortable with your body during and after breast cancer treatment is a personal journey that is different for every woman. Information and support can help you cope with these changes over time.
Feeling good about your body during and after breast cancer treatment
Along with the emotional, mental, and financial stresses that cancer and its treatment can cause, many women with breast cancer also find themselves coping with changes in their appearance as a result of their treatment.
Some changes may be temporary, such as hair loss. But even short-term changes can have a profound effect on how a woman feels about herself. A number of options are available to help women cope with hair loss, including wigs, hats, scarves, and other accessories. Alternatively, some choose to use their baldness as a way to identify themselves as breast cancer survivors.
Other changes can be permanent, like the loss of part or all of a breast (or breasts) after surgery. Some women choose to have reconstructive surgery to rebuild the breast mound, while others might choose not to. If you decide not to have breast reconstruction, you can decide whether to wear a breast form or prosthesis or not.
Sexuality after breast cancer
You may have concerns about sexuality after breast cancer. Physical changes, especially after breast surgery, can make some women less comfortable with their bodies. There may be a loss of sensation in the affected breast. Other treatments for breast cancer, such as chemotherapy and hormone therapy, can change your hormone levels and may affect your sexual interest and/or response.
Relationship issues are also important. Your partner might worry about how to express love physically and emotionally after treatment, especially after surgery. But breast cancer can be a growth experience for couples – especially when both partners take part in decision making and go to treatments.
To learn more, see Sex and the Adult Female with Cancer.
Finding help and support after breast cancer treatment
Regardless of the changes you may experience, it's important to know that there is advice and support out there to help you cope. Speaking with your doctor or other members of your health care team is often a good starting point to find it. There are also many support groups available, such as the American Cancer Society Reach To Recovery program. This program matches you with a local volunteer who has had breast cancer. Your Reach To Recovery volunteer can answer many of your questions and can give you suggestions, additional reading material, and advice. Remember that she's been there and will probably understand.
Some studies suggest that younger women tend to have more problems adjusting to the stresses of breast cancer and its treatment. It can feel socially isolating. Younger women might also be more affected by issues of sexuality or fertility (the ability to have children). Some younger women might be thinking about starting a family or having more children, and they might worry about how the cancer and its treatment might affect this. Others might have already started families and might worry about how family members might be affected. For more on this, see Pregnancy After Breast Cancer.
If you are having trouble adjusting after a breast cancer diagnosis, a counselor or a support group can often be helpful. If you aren’t sure who can help, call your American Cancer Society at 1-800-227-2345. We can put you in touch with a group or resource that may work for you.Breast cancer is most common in older women. But if you are a younger woman who has had breast cancer, you might question if this has affected your fertility (ability to have children) and if there are any extra risks if you become pregnant.
Many women are able to become pregnant after being treated for breast cancer. However, some treatments can make it harder to get pregnant. If you think you might want to have children one day, or just want to keep your options open, the best time to talk to your doctor about this is before you begin breast cancer treatment.
Can I have a baby after having breast cancer?
Some treatments for breast cancer might affect a woman’s fertility. For example, chemotherapy for breast cancer might damage the ovaries, which can sometimes cause immediate or delayed infertility. Still, many women are able to become pregnant after treatment. For more about how cancer treatment can affect fertility, see Female Fertility and Cancer.
Could pregnancy or breastfeeding make my breast cancer come back?
Many breast cancers are sensitive to estrogen, so there has been concern that for women who have had breast cancer, the high hormone levels that result from a pregnancy might increase the chance of the cancer coming back. However, studies have not shown that pregnancy increases the risk of the cancer coming back after successful treatment.
Some women might not be able to breastfeed after breast cancer treatment, depending on the treatment they received and other factors (see below). But for those who are able to, breastfeeding after treatment is not thought to increase the risk of breast cancer recurrence. Breastfeeding (especially for a year or more) is linked to a lower risk of developing breast cancer, although there is less research about whether it can help  lower the risk of breast cancer coming back after treatment.
How long after breast cancer treatment should I wait before becoming pregnant?
Breast cancer survivors who want to become pregnant are sometimes advised to wait at least 2 years after treatment is finished before trying. The best length of time to wait is not clear, but 2 years is thought to be enough time to find any early return of the cancer, which could affect your decision to become pregnant.
For women with hormone receptor-positive breast cancer, adjuvant hormone therapy is typically recommended for 5 to 10 years after the initial treatment. Women who want to have children during this time are often advised to take hormone therapy for at least 2 years before stopping it and then waiting a few months before trying to become pregnant. Hormone therapy can then be started again after the baby is born.
Keep in mind that the advice about waiting 2 years is not based on data from any clinical trials. And some breast cancers can come back after the 2-year mark, so every case is different. Your decision should take into account many things, including your age, desire for more pregnancies, type of breast cancer, and the risk of the cancer coming back early.
If I get pregnant, would my history of breast cancer put my baby at risk?
Having a history of breast cancer does seem to be linked to an increased risk of some possible complications of pregnancy, including pre-term delivery, having a low-birth-weight baby, and the need for a cesarean section (C-section).
But research has not found that a woman’s past breast cancer has any direct effect on her baby. There is no increased rate of birth defects or other long-term health concerns in children born to women who have had breast cancer.
Could breast cancer treatment affect my unborn baby?
If you are still getting any type of treatment for breast cancer, including chemotherapy, hormone therapy, targeted therapy, or immunotherapy, talk to your doctor before trying to become pregnant. Many of these drugs might affect a growing fetus, so it is safer to wait until all treatment is complete before getting pregnant.
It’s also important to remember that stopping treatment early can increase the risk of the cancer growing or coming back. See Treating Breast Cancer During Pregnancy for more on this.
Can I breastfeed after breast cancer treatment?
If you have had breast surgery and/or radiation, you might have problems breastfeeding from the affected breast. This might include reduced milk production in that breast as well as structural changes that can make breastfeeding painful, or make it harder for the baby to latch onto the breast. Still, many women are able to breastfeed.
If you are still taking any medicines to treat your breast cancer (such as hormone therapy), it’s very important to talk with your doctor before trying to breastfeed. Some drugs can enter the breast milk and might affect the baby.
Talk to your doctor
If you have or have had breast cancer and are thinking about having children, talk with your doctor. Ask how the cancer and its treatment might affect your chances for pregnancy, as well as if being pregnant could affect your risk of the cancer coming back.
In many cases, counseling can help you sort through the choices that come with surviving breast cancer and planning a pregnancy.Taking post-menopausal hormone therapy (PHT), also called hormone replacement therapy (HRT), to help with menopause symptoms may not be safe for women who have had breast cancer. If you are bothered by menopause symptoms, talk to your doctor about ways to get relief.
Many women have menopause symptoms such as hot flashes after treatment for breast cancer. This can happen naturally as women get older, but it can also be caused by some breast cancer treatments. Some pre-menopausal women have menopause symptoms as a result of chemotherapy or from hormone therapy drugs used to treat breast cancer (such as tamoxifen and aromatase inhibitors). Women who are past menopause might also get symptoms if they had to stop taking PHT when they were diagnosed with breast cancer.
Can I take menopausal hormone therapy after breast cancer?
When women reach menopause, some choose to take PHT, which is made up of female hormones (estrogen, sometimes along with progesterone) to help reduce menopause symptoms. But there have been concerns about women who have had breast cancer using PHT, because of the known link between estrogen levels and breast cancer growth.
A well-designed clinical trial (the HABITS study) found that breast cancer survivors taking PHT were much more likely to develop a new or recurrent breast cancer (cancer that comes back after treatment) than women who were not taking these hormones. Because of this, doctors generally do not recommend PHT if a woman was previously treated for breast cancer.
Relieving menopausal symptoms without hormone therapy
If you are having trouble with menopause symptoms, such as hot flashes, talk to your doctor about ways other than PHT to help with specific symptoms. Some women might want to try using non-hormonal medicines or other methods first to see if they help.
Losing weight
Some women find that losing weight helps with menopausal symptoms such as hot flashes.
Diet and dietary supplements
Some women find that changing the way they eat, such as eating smaller meals and avoiding ‘triggers’ (such as spicy foods) is helpful for them.
The effects of specific foods and dietary supplements on menopausal symptoms are not clear. This doesn’t mean they won’t help, but it’s important to understand that the evidence supporting their use is limited.
Phytoestrogens: These are estrogen-like substances found in certain plants, such as soy, red clover, and black cohosh. Some women take supplements containing these substances to try to help with symptoms of menopause.
Eating soy foods seems to be safe for breast cancer survivors, although it’s not clear if it can help relieve menopause symptoms. Women can get higher doses of phytoestrogens in some dietary supplements (such as soy or isoflavone supplements). However, not enough is known about these supplements to know for sure if they are safe and if they work. If you are considering taking one of these supplements, be sure to talk with your doctor first.
Exercise, relaxation techniques, and behavioral therapies
Some women find these types of approaches help them with menopausal symptoms. Although there is only limited research showing these techniques might be helpful, there’s likely to be little harm in trying them. Before starting any exercise program after being diagnosed with breast cancer, it’s important to speak with your doctor or someone on your health care team.
Some research has suggested that acupuncture might be helpful in treating hot flashes, although not all studies have found this. This might be another option to discuss with your doctor.
Non-hormone medicines for hot flashes
Drugs without hormone properties that may be helpful in treating hot flashes include:

Certain antidepressant drugs, such as venlafaxine (Effexor), citalopram (Celexa), or paroxetine (Paxil)*
The nerve drug gabapentin (Neurontin)
The blood pressure drug clonidine
Oxybutynin, a drug used to treat overactive bladder
Fezolinetant (Veozah), a drug that targets the nervous system activity that can lead to hot flashes

*If you are taking tamoxifen, it's important to note that some antidepressants can interact with tamoxifen and could make it less effective. Ask your doctor about any possible interactions between tamoxifen and any drugs you are taking.
Treatments for vaginal dryness
Vaginal dryness and discomfort can be bothersome menopausal symptoms for some women.
Several non-hormone treatments, including vaginal moisturizers, lubricants, and gels, are available to help treat vaginal dryness. If these aren't helpful, low-dose hormonal rings, tablets, capsules, or creams that are put directly into the vagina might be helpful.
Devices that use lasers or other forms of energy to 'rejuvenate' vaginal tissue are now being studied as well, although it's not yet clear how helpful they might be. It's important to discuss the possible risks and benefits of these treatments with your doctor before deciding if one is right for you.Breast cancer survivors can be affected by a number of health problems, but often a major concern is facing cancer again.
If this happens, it’s most often the result of the breast cancer coming back after treatment. This is called a breast cancer recurrence. But some cancer survivors develop a new, unrelated cancer later on. This is called a second cancer.
Women who’ve had breast cancer can still get other cancers. Although most breast cancer survivors don’t get cancer again, they are at higher risk for getting some types of cancer.
The most common second cancer in breast cancer survivors is another breast cancer. (This is different from the first cancer coming back.) The new cancer can develop in the opposite breast, or in the same breast for women who were treated with breast-conserving surgery (such as a lumpectomy).
Depending on which types of cancer treatment they received (and other factors), some breast cancer survivors might also be at higher-than-average risk for:

Salivary gland cancer
Esophagus cancer
Stomach cancer
Colon cancer
Uterine cancer
Ovarian cancer
Thyroid cancer
Soft tissue cancer (sarcoma)
Melanoma of the skin
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML)

Of course, breast cancer survivors can get other types of cancer as well.
The increased risk for these cancers can be due to a number of factors, including genetic risk factors and the use of some types of breast cancer treatments. For example:

Women with inherited mutations in one of the BRCA genes have an increased risk of breast cancer, ovarian cancer, and some other cancers.
Radiation therapy to the chest as part of treatment seems to increase the risk for lung cancer (especially in women who smoke), sarcomas (cancers of connective tissues such as blood vessels and bones), and certain blood cancers, such as leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). Overall, though, the increase in risk is small, and the overall risk of these cancers is still low. 
Certain chemotherapy (chemo) drugs can increase the risk of developing leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) slightly.
While tamoxifen can lower the chance of hormone receptor-positive breast cancer coming back (as well as the risk of getting a second breast cancer), it can increase the risk of uterine cancer (endometrial cancer and uterine sarcoma). Still, the overall risk of uterine cancer in most women taking tamoxifen is low, so the benefits of this drug in treating breast cancer are generally greater than the small increase in risk of a second cancer.

Follow-up after breast cancer treatment
If you have completed treatment for breast cancer, you should still see your doctor regularly, both to look for signs that the cancer might have come back and to look for any late effects from cancer treatment.
If you have not had both breasts removed, you still need regular mammograms to look for breast cancer (either a recurrence of the cancer or a new breast cancer). See Follow-up Care After Breast Cancer Treatment for more on the other types of tests you might need after treatment.
You should also follow the American Cancer Society guidelines for the early detection of cancer, such as those for colorectal cancer and cervical cancer. Screening tests can often find these cancers early, when they are likely to be easier to treat. In some cases, the tests might even help prevent these cancers if pre-cancers are found and treated. For women who have had breast cancer, most experts do not recommend any additional testing to look for second cancers unless you have symptoms. 
Let your doctor know about any new symptoms or problems, because they could be caused by the breast cancer coming back or by a new disease or second cancer. For example, abnormal menstrual bleeding, such as bleeding or spotting after menopause or between periods, can be a symptom of uterine cancer.
Can I lower my risk of getting a second cancer?
There's no sure way to prevent all cancers, but there are steps you can take to lower your risk and stay as healthy as possible. Getting the recommended early detection tests, as mentioned above, is one way to do this.
It’s also important to stay away from tobacco products. Smoking increases the risk of many cancers, including some of the second cancers that are more likely after breast cancer.
To help maintain good health, breast cancer survivors should also follow the ﻿ACS Guidelines on Diet and Physical Activity for Cancer Prevention:

Get to and stay at a healthy weight.
Keep physically active and limit the time you spend sitting or lying down.
Follow a healthy eating pattern that includes plenty of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains, and limits or avoids red and processed meats, sugary drinks, and highly processed foods.
It's best not to drink alcohol. Women who drink should have no more than 1 drink per day.

These steps may also lower the risk of some other health problems.
See Second Cancers in Adults for more information about causes of second cancers.Many breast lumps turn out to be non-cancerous (benign) changes in fibrous tissue (fibrosis) and/or cysts, which together are known as fibrocystic changes. These changes used to be called fibrocystic disease, but they are a normal finding in many women. 
Fibrocystic changes are most common in women of child-bearing age, but they can affect women of any age.
Fibrosis
Fibrosis refers to an area of fibrous tissue, the same tissue that ligaments and scar tissue are made of. Areas of fibrosis can feel rubbery or firm to the touch.
Cysts
Cysts are fluid-filled, round or oval sacs within the breasts. They are often felt as a round, movable lump (or lumps), which might be tender to the touch. They are most common in women in their 30s or 40s, but they can occur in women of any age. Monthly hormone changes often cause cysts to get bigger and become painful and sometimes more noticeable just before the menstrual period.
Cysts begin when fluid starts to build up inside the breast glands. They start as microcysts (very small cysts), which are too small to feel unless they are part of a cluster (group) of microcysts. If fluid continues to build up, they can develop into macrocysts (large cysts). These can often be felt easily and can be as large as 1 or 2 inches across.
Diagnosis of fibrocystic changes
Most often, fibrocystic changes are diagnosed based on symptoms, such as breast lumps, swelling, and/or tenderness or pain. These symptoms tend to be worse just before your menstrual period, and they may change (such as the lumps growing or shrinking) during different stages of your menstrual cycle. At times you may notice some nipple discharge.
If there is a concern about a lump possibly being cancer, a breast ultrasound typically is done to see if the lump is solid or if it has fluid in it (that is, if it's a cyst). There are different types of cysts:

A simple cyst is filled entirely with fluid. Simple cysts are not a cause for concern.
A complicated cyst is similar to a simple cyst, but it has what looks like ‘debris’ floating in the fluid. Complicated cysts are very unlikely to be cancer, but in some cases a doctor might advise a follow-up exam or a procedure to remove the fluid with a thin, hollow needle, just to be sure.
A complex cystic and solid mass has features such as a solid component or thick outer walls. These findings have a higher chance of being cancer, so a biopsy is usually needed to find out for sure.

How do fibrocystic changes affect your risk for breast cancer?
Neither fibrosis nor simple cysts increase your risk of later developing breast cancer.
There is a small chance complicated cysts and complex cystic and solid masses might contain cancer or put you at higher risk of breast cancer later on, depending on what is found on a biopsy.
Treatment of fibrocystic changes
Fibrocystic changes in the breast are thought to be natural, so generally no treatment is needed unless they are causing discomfort.
Cysts that are painful can be drained using a thin, hollow needle, which might be done to confirm the diagnosis. Removing the fluid may reduce pressure and pain for some time. If removed, the fluid might come back later, but cysts may also go away over time. Surgery might be an option to remove cysts that continue to come back and cause symptoms.
Most women with fibrocystic changes and without bothersome symptoms do not need treatment, but the doctor might recommend watching the changes closely. If you have mild discomfort, you may get relief from well-fitted, supportive bras, applying heat, or using over-the-counter pain relievers.
Some women report that their breast symptoms improve if they avoid caffeine and other stimulants found in coffee, tea, chocolate, and many soft drinks. Studies have not found a clear link between these stimulants and breast symptoms, but many women feel that avoiding these foods and drinks for a couple of months is worth trying.
Because breast swelling toward the end of the menstrual cycle is painful for some women, some doctors recommend over-the-counter pain relievers such as acetaminophen or ibuprofen, or other medicines. It’s been suggested that some types of vitamin or herbal supplements might relieve symptoms, but so far none have been proven to be helpful, and some may have side effects if taken in large doses. Some doctors prescribe hormones, such as oral contraceptives (birth control pills), tamoxifen, or androgens. But these are usually given only to women with severe symptoms because they also can have serious side effects.
If you have breast symptoms that aren't improving or are getting worse, it's important to see your doctor for further evaluation.Hyperplasia is an overgrowth of the cells that line the lobules (milk-producing glands) or ducts (small tubes) inside the breast. It is not cancer, but some types of hyperplasia are linked with a higher risk of developing breast cancer (see below). 
Hyperplasia can be described as either usual or atypical, based on how the cells look under a microscope.

In usual ductal hyperplasia, there is an overgrowth of cells lining the ducts in the breast, but the cells look very close to normal.
In atypical hyperplasia (or hyperplasia with atypia), the cells look more distorted and abnormal. This can be either atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH) or atypical lobular hyperplasia (ALH).

Diagnosis of hyperplasia
Hyperplasia doesn’t usually cause a lump that can be felt, but it can sometimes cause changes that can be seen on a mammogram. It’s diagnosed by doing a biopsy, during which a hollow needle or surgery is used to take out some of the abnormal breast tissue for testing.
How does hyperplasia affect your risk for breast cancer?
Hyperplasia can affect your risk for breast cancer, but how much depends on what type it is:

Usual ductal hyperplasia (also known as moderate or florid hyperplasia of the usual type, without atypia): The risk of breast cancer is about 1½ to 2 times higher than that of a woman with no breast abnormalities.
Atypical hyperplasia (either ADH or ALH): The risk of breast cancer is about 4 to 5 times higher than that of a woman with no breast abnormalities. More details about pathology reports showing atypical hyperplasia can be found in Understanding Your Pathology Report: Atypical Hyperplasia.

Treatment of hyperplasia
Usual ductal hyperplasia is considered a normal finding in the breast and does not need to be treated. 
If either ADH or ALH is found i﻿n a needle biopsy sample, surgery may be recommended to remove more breast tissue around it. This is to be sure that there is nothing more serious, such as cancer, nearby. If ADH or ALH is found after a surgical biopsy, typically no other treatment is needed.
Reducing breast cancer risk or finding it early
Both ADH and ALH are linked to a higher risk of breast cancer. Even though most women with ADH or ALH will not develop breast cancer, it's still important to talk with a health care provider about your risk and what you can do about it.
Options for women at higher risk of breast cancer from ADH or ALH may include:

Seeing a health care provider more often (such as every 6 to 12 months) for a breast exam along with a yearly mammogram. Additional imaging with breast MRIs may also be recommended, especially if you have other factors that raise your risk of breast cancer.
Making lifestyle changes to lower breast cancer risk. To learn more, see Can I Lower My Risk of Breast Cancer?   
Taking medicine to help lower breast cancer risk. For more on this, see Deciding Whether to Use Medicine to Reduce Breast Cancer Risk.Lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS) is a type of breast change that is sometimes seen when a breast biopsy is done. In LCIS, cells that look like cancer cells are growing in the lining of the milk-producing glands (lobules) of the breast, but they don’t invade through the wall of the lobules.
LCIS is not considered cancer, and it typically does not spread beyond the lobule (that is, it doesn't become invasive breast cancer) if it isn’t treated. But having LCIS does increase your risk of later developing an invasive breast cancer in either breast. (See "How does LCIS affect breast cancer risk?")
LCIS and another type of breast change (atypical lobular hyperplasia, or ALH) are types of lobular neoplasia. These are benign (non-cancerous) conditions, but they both increase your risk of breast cancer.
The different types of LCIS are:

Classic LCIS: The cells lining the lobules of the breast are smaller and are about the same size.
Pleomorphic LCIS: The cells lining the lobules of the breast are larger and look more abnormal.
Florid LCIS: The cells lining the lobules have grown into a large enough group that they have formed a mass, typically with an area of dead cells in the middle (called central necrosis).

Diagnosis of LCIS
Classic LCIS usually doesn't cause a lump that can be felt or changes that can be seen on a mammogram, although pleomorphic and florid LCIS are sometimes found this way. Most often, LCIS is found when a breast biopsy is done for another problem that’s nearby. (During a biopsy, small pieces of breast tissue are removed and checked in the lab.)
You can learn more about pathology reports showing LCIS in Understanding Your Pathology Report: Lobular Carcinoma In Situ.
How does LCIS affect breast cancer risk?
Women with LCIS have about a 7 to 12 times higher risk of developing invasive cancer in either breast. For this reason, doctors typically recommend that women with LCIS have regular breast cancer screening tests and follow-up visits with a health care provider for the rest of their lives.
Treatment for LCIS
Having LCIS does increase your risk of developing invasive breast cancer later on. But since LCIS is not a true cancer or pre-cancer, often no treatment is needed after the biopsy.
Sometimes if LCIS is found using a needle biopsy, the doctor might recommend that it be removed completely (with an excisional biopsy or some other type of breast-conserving surgery) to help make sure that LCIS was the only abnormality there. This is especially true if the LCIS is described as pleomorphic or florid, in which case it might be more likely to grow quickly.
Even after an excisional biopsy, if pleomorphic or florid LCIS is found, some doctors might recommend another, more extensive surgery to make sure it has all been removed.
Reducing breast cancer risk or finding it early
Close follow-up is important because women with LCIS have the same increased risk of developing cancer in both breasts. Women should also talk to a health care provider about what they can do to help reduce their breast cancer risk. Options for women at high risk of breast cancer because of LCIS may include:

Seeing a health care provider more often (such as every 6 to 12 months) for a breast exam along with the yearly mammogram. Additional imaging with breast MRI may also be recommended, especially if a woman has other factors that raise her risk of breast cancer.
Making lifestyle changes to lower breast cancer risk. To learn more, see Can I Lower My Risk of Breast Cancer?  
Taking medicine to help lower the risk of breast cancer. For more on this, see Deciding Whether to Use Medicine to Reduce Breast Cancer Risk.
Surgery, called bilateral prophylactic mastectomy (removal of both breasts), to reduce risk. (This is more likely to be a reasonable option in women who also have other risk factors for breast cancer, such as a BRCA gene mutation.)  This may be followed later by breast reconstruction.Adenosis is a benign (non-cancerous) breast condition in which the lobules (milk-producing glands) are enlarged, and there are more glands than usual. Adenosis is often found in biopsy samples of women who have fibrocystic changes in their breasts.
There are many other names for this condition, including aggregate adenosis, tumoral adenosis, or adenosis tumor. Even though some of these terms contain the term tumor, adenosis is not breast cancer.
Sclerosing adenosis is a special type of adenosis in which the enlarged lobules are distorted by scar-like tissue. This type may cause breast pain.
Diagnosis of breast adenosis
If many enlarged lobules are close to one another, they may be large enough to be felt as a breast lump. In cases like this, a breast exam may not be enough to tell if the lump is adenosis or something else (such as breast cancer).
Calcifications (mineral deposits) can form in adenosis (including sclerosing adenosis), as well as in breast cancers. These can show up on mammograms, which can make it hard to tell these conditions apart.
Because of these uncertainties, a breast biopsy is usually needed to know if the breast change is caused by adenosis or cancer. (In a biopsy, small pieces of breast tissue are removed and checked under a microscope.)
Treatment of adenosis
Adenosis doesn't usually need to be treated, unless it's causing bothersome symptoms. 
How does adenosis affect your risk for breast cancer?
Most types of adenosis are not thought to increase breast cancer risk, although some studies have found that women with sclerosing adenosis have a slightly higher risk of breast cancer.Fibroadenomas are common, benign (non-cancerous) breast tumors made up of both glandular tissue and stromal (connective) tissue. 
Fibroadenomas are most common in women in their 20s and 30s, but they can be found in women of any age. They tend to shrink after a woman goes through menopause.
Diagnosis of fibroadenomas
Some fibroadenomas are too small to be felt, but some can be up to several inches across. A woman can have one or many fibroadenomas. 
Fibroadenomas can often feel like a marble within the breast. They tend to be round or oval and have clear-cut borders. You can move them under the skin, and they’re usually firm or rubbery, but not tender. Some fibroadenomas are only found by an imaging test (such as a mammogram or ultrasound).
A breast biopsy (removing some breast tissue to check it in the lab) may be needed to know for sure if a breast mass is a fibroadenoma (or some other condition).
Most fibroadenomas look the same all over when seen under a microscope. These are called simple fibroadenomas. But some fibroadenomas have other changes, too, and are called complex fibroadenomas. (Complex fibroadenomas tend to be bigger and tend to occur in older patients.)
How do fibroadenomas affect your risk for breast cancer?
Simple fibroadenomas do not seem to increase breast cancer risk by much, if at all. Complex fibroadenomas seem to increase the risk slightly more than simple fibroadenomas.
Treatment of fibroadenomas
Most fibroadenomas don't need to be treated. But doctors might recommend removing them in some cases, especially if they keep growing or change the shape of the breast.
Sometimes fibroadenomas stop growing or even shrink on their own, without any treatment. As long as the doctor feels sure the masses are fibroadenomas and not breast cancer, they can often be left in place and watched to be sure they don’t grow. This approach is useful for women with many fibroadenomas that aren't growing. In such cases, removing them might mean removing a lot of nearby normal breast tissue, causing scarring and changes in the shape and texture of the breast.
It’s important that women with fibroadenomas have regular breast exams or imaging tests to make sure the fibroadenomas are not growing.
Sometimes one or more new fibroadenomas can appear after one is removed. This usually means that another fibroadenoma has formed – it does not mean that the old one has come back.Phyllodes tumors (or phylloides tumors) are rare breast tumors that start in the connective (stromal) tissue of the breast, not the ducts or glands (which is where most breast cancers start). Most phyllodes tumors are benign and only a small number are malignant (cancer).
Phyllodes tumors are most common in women in their 40s, but women of any age can have them. Women with Li-Fraumeni syndrome (a rare, inherited genetic condition) have an increased risk for phyllodes tumors.
Phyllodes tumors are often divided into 3 groups, based on how they look under a microscope:

Benign (non-cancerous) tumors account for more than half of all phyllodes tumors. These tumors are the least likely to grow quickly or to spread.
Borderline tumors have features in between benign and malignant (cancerous) tumors.
Malignant (cancerous) tumors account for about 1 in 4 phyllodes tumors. These tend to grow the fastest and are the most likely to spread or to come back after treatment.

Diagnosis of phyllodes tumors
Phyllodes tumors are usually felt as a firm, painless breast lump, but some may hurt. They tend to grow large fairly quickly, and they often stretch the skin.
Sometimes these tumors are seen first on an imaging test (like an ultrasound or mammogram), in which case they’re often hard to tell apart from fibroadenomas. 
The diagnosis can often be made with a core needle biopsy, but sometimes the entire tumor needs to be removed (during an excisional biopsy) to know for sure that it’s a phyllodes tumor, and whether it's malignant or not.
How do phyllodes tumors affect your risk for breast cancer?
Having a benign phyllodes tumor does not affect your breast cancer risk. If you have a malignant phyllodes tumor, it does not affect your risk of getting other types of breast cancer. Still, you may be watched more closely and get regular imaging tests after treatment for a phyllodes tumor, because these tumors can sometimes come back after surgery.
Treatment of phyllodes tumors
Phyllodes tumors typically need to be removed completely with surgery. 
If the tumor is found to be benign, an excisional biopsy might be all that is needed, as long as the tumor was removed completely.
If the tumor is borderline or malignant, a wider margin (area of normal tissue around the tumor) usually needs to be removed as well. This might be done with breast-conserving surgery (lumpectomy or partial mastectomy), in which part of the breast is removed. Or the entire breast might be removed with a mastectomy, especially if a margin of normal breast tissue can't be taken out with breast-conserving surgery. Radiation therapy might be given to the area after surgery, especially if it’s not clear that all of the tumor was removed.
Malignant phyllodes tumors are different from the more common types of breast cancer. They are less likely to respond to some of the treatments commonly used for breast cancer, such as the hormone therapy or chemotherapy drugs normally used for breast cancer. Phyllodes tumors that have spread to other parts of the body are often treated more like sarcomas (soft-tissue cancers) than breast cancers.
Phyllodes tumors can sometimes come back in the same place. Because of this, close follow-up with frequent breast exams and imaging tests are usually recommended after treatment.Intraductal papillomas are benign (non-cancerous), wart-like tumors that grow within the milk ducts of the breast. They are made up of gland tissue along with fibrous tissue and blood vessels (called fibrovascular tissue).
Solitary papillomas (solitary intraductal papillomas) are single tumors that often grow in the large milk ducts near the nipple. They are a common cause of clear or bloody nipple discharge, especially when it comes from only one breast. They may be felt as a small lump behind or next to the nipple. Sometimes they can be painful.
Papillomas may also be found in small ducts in areas of the breast farther from the nipple. In this case, there are often several growths (multiple papillomas). These are less likely to cause nipple discharge.
In papillomatosis, there are very small areas of cell growth within the ducts, but they aren’t as distinct as papillomas are. 
Diagnosis of breast papillomas
Papillomas might cause symptoms such as clear or bloody nipple discharge (or a breast lump), or they might show up as an abnormal area on an imaging test (such as a mammogram or breast ultrasound).
A ductogram (galactogram), in which dye is injected into the nipple duct where the discharge is likely coming from and then an x-ray is taken, may sometimes be helpful in finding papillomas.
If symptoms or an imaging test can pinpoint an area of concern, a breast biopsy of the area can be done to confirm the diagnosis. In some cases, surgery (duct excision) may be done to look at the area more closely.
How do intraductal papillomas affect your risk for breast cancer?
Having a single (solitary) papilloma does not raise breast cancer risk unless it contains other breast changes, such as atypical hyperplasia. However, having multiple papillomas increases breast cancer risk slightly.
Treatment of breast papillomas
Whether or not papillomas need to be treated depends on factors such as their size, if there is more than one, and if they’re causing symptoms. Because papillomas can sometimes be linked with other, more serious breast findings, doctors may recommend surgery to remove them and the part of the duct they're in.Fat necrosis is a benign (non-cancerous) breast condition that can develop when an area of fatty breast tissue is injured. It can also develop after breast surgery or radiation treatment.
There are different stages of fat necrosis. As the fat cells die, they release their contents, forming a sac-like collection of greasy fluid called an oil cyst. Over time, calcifications (small deposits of calcium) can form around the walls of the cyst, which can often be seen on mammograms. As the body continues to repair the damaged breast tissue, it's usually replaced by denser scar tissue.
Diagnosis of fat necrosis and oil cysts
Oil cysts and areas of fat necrosis can form a lump that can be felt, but it usually doesn’t hurt. The skin around the lump might look thicker, red, or bruised. Sometimes these changes can be hard to tell apart from cancers on a breast exam or even a mammogram. If this is the case, a breast biopsy (removing all or part of the lump to look at the tissue under the microscope) might be needed to find out if the lump contains cancer cells.
Doctors can usually tell an oil cyst by the way it looks on a mammogram or breast ultrasound. But if it could be something else, some type of needle biopsy (a fine needle aspiration or core needle biopsy) might be done.
How do fat necrosis and oil cysts affect breast cancer risk?
These breast changes do not affect your risk for breast cancer.
Treatment of fat necrosis and oil cysts
As long as doctors are sure of the diagnosis, fat necrosis and oil cysts usually don’t need to be treated. Sometimes fat necrosis goes away on its own. If a needle biopsy is done to remove the fluid in an oil cyst, it can also serve as treatment.
If the lump gets bigger or becomes bothersome, however, surgery may be done to remove it.Mastitis is inflammation (swelling) in the breast, which is usually caused by an infection. It is most common when a woman is breastfeeding, but it can happen at other times as well.
A clogged milk duct that doesn't let milk fully drain from the breast, or breaks in the skin of the nipple can lead to infection. This causes the body’s white blood cells to release substances to fight the infection, which can lead to swelling and increased blood flow. The infected part of the breast may become swollen, painful, red, and warm to the touch. Mastitis can also cause fever and a headache, or general flu-like symptoms.
Diagnosis of mastitis
Mastitis can often be diagnosed based on symptoms and the results of a breast exam. It usually affects only one breast.
How does mastitis affect your risk of breast cancer?
Having mastitis does not raise your risk of developing breast cancer.
Treatment of mastitis
Mastitis is typically treated with antibiotics, along with emptying the milk from the breast. In some cases, a breast abscess (a collection of pus) may form. Abscesses are treated by draining the pus, either by surgery or by aspiration (using a thin, hollow needle, often guided by ultrasound), and then antibiotics. 
Inflammatory breast cancer has symptoms that are a lot like mastitis and can be mistaken for an infection. If you’ve been diagnosed with mastitis and antibiotic treatment doesn’t help within a week or so, you might need a skin biopsy to be sure it’s not cancer. Inflammatory breast cancer can spread quickly, so don’t put off going back to the doctor if you still have symptoms after antibiotic treatment.Duct ectasia, also known as mammary duct ectasia, is a benign (non-cancerous) breast condition that occurs when a milk duct in the breast widens and its walls thicken. This can cause the duct to become blocked and lead to fluid build-up. It’s more common in women who are getting close to menopause. But it can happen at other ages, too.
Diagnosis of duct ectasia
Often, this condition causes no symptoms and is found when a biopsy (removal of small pieces of breast tissue to be checked with a microscope) is done for another breast problem.
Less often, duct ectasia may cause a nipple discharge, which is often sticky and thick. The nipple and nearby breast tissue may be tender and red, and the nipple may be pulled inward. Sometimes scar tissue around the abnormal duct causes a hard lump that may be confused with cancer. A mammogram and/or breast ultrasound may be done to learn more about the changed part of your breast.
How does duct ectasia affect your breast cancer risk?
Duct ectasia does not increase your risk for breast cancer.

Treatment of duct ectasia
Duct ectasia that is causing symptoms sometimes gets better without treatment. Warm compresses and antibiotics may be used in some cases. If the symptoms don't go away, the abnormal duct might need to be surgically removed.What is breast cancer?
Breast cancer is cancer that starts in the breast. It starts when cells in the breast begin to grow out of control. It can start in one or both breasts.
Breast cancer cells usually form a tumor that can often be seen on a mammogram or ultrasound or felt as a lump. Breast cancer is most common in women, but men also can get breast cancer .
Breast cancer cells can spread to other parts of the body and grow there, too. When cancer cells do this, it’s called metastasis.
Cancer is named for the place where it starts. So even if breast cancer spreads to the bones (or any other place), it’s still called breast cancer. It’s not called bone cancer unless it starts from cells in the bone.Mammograms (breast x-rays) are the best tests we have to find breast cancer early, when it may be easier to treat. Talk with your health care provider about when you should get a mammogram.  Here’s what you need to know about getting a mammogram.
1.  What is a mammogram?
A mammogram is an x-ray of the breast that’s used to find breast changes. Mammograms are done with a machine that only looks at breast tissue. The machine takes x-rays at lower doses of radiation than the x-rays done to look at other parts of the body.
2. Where to Get It
Find a center that does many mammograms in a day. When you find a center you like, stick with it. Having all your mammograms at the same center will make it easier for doctors to compare images from one year to the next. If you’ve had mammograms done at other centers, have those images sent to your new center.
3. When to Schedule It
It’s best to schedule your mammogram about a week after your menstrual period. Your breasts won’t be as tender or swollen, which means less discomfort during the mammogram.
4. What (and What Not) to Wear
Wear a 2-piece outfit because you will need to remove your top and bra. Do not use deodorant, antiperspirant, powder, lotion, or ointment on or around your chest on the day of your mammogram. These products can appear as white spots on the x-ray.
5. What to Expect
The entire process takes about 20 minutes. The breast is compressed between 2 plastic plates for a few seconds while an x-ray is taken. The plates are moved to a new position and the breast is compressed again to take another view. The same process is done on the other breast. Flattening the breast can be uncomfortable but is needed to provide the clearest view.
6. Getting the Results
You should get your results within 10 days. If you don’t, you should call to ask about them. If doctors find an area that looks different from the rest of your breast, you’ll likely need to get new x-rays taken or get other tests. But that doesn’t mean you have cancer. The doctor may have seen dense breast tissue or a cyst. Other times, the image just isn’t clear and needs to be retaken. If this is your first mammogram, your doctor may want to look at an area more closely because there is no previous mammogram to compare it with.
7. What You Pay
For women who are uninsured or can’t afford the cost, free or low-cost mammogram services are available. Some of these programs are held during National Breast Cancer Month in October, while others are offered year-round. Call the American Cancer Society at 1-800-227-2345 to find a program near you.
Visit cancer.org/breastcancer for more breast cancer information and support.