Cancer starts when cells in the body begin to grow out of control. Cells in nearly any part of the body can become cancer, and can then spread to other areas of the body. To learn more about cancer and how it starts and spreads, see What Is Cancer?
For statistical purposes, cancers in adolescents are often thought of as those that start between the ages of 15 and 19. Cancer is not common in teens, but a variety of cancer types can occur in this age group, and treating these cancers can be challenging for a number of reasons.
Most cancers occur in older adults. Cancers that start in childhood (before age 15) are much less common. The types of cancers that develop in children are often different from the types that develop in adults. Childhood cancers are often the result of DNA (gene) changes in cells that take place very early in life, sometimes even before birth. Unlike many cancers in adults, childhood cancers are not strongly linked to lifestyle or environmental risk factors.
The types of cancers that occur in adolescents (ages 15 to 19) are a mix of many of the types that can develop in children and adults. The types of cancers seen in adolescents are not unique to this age group, but the most common types are different from those most common in young children or adults.  
Lymphoma
Lymphomas are cancers that start in immune system cells called lymphocytes. These cancers most often start in lymph nodes or in other lymph tissues, like the tonsils or thymus (a small organ in front of the heart). They can also affect the bone marrow and other organs. Symptoms depend on where the cancer starts and can include weight loss, fever, sweats, tiredness, and lumps (swollen lymph nodes) under the skin in the neck, armpit, or groin.
The 2 main types of lymphoma are:

Hodgkin lymphoma (Hodgkin disease)
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma

Both types can occur in adolescents.
Hodgkin lymphoma is most common in 2 age groups: early adulthood (ages 15 to 40, but usually people in their 20s) and late adulthood (after age 55). This type of cancer is similar in all age groups, including which types of treatment work best.
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is less common than Hodgkin lymphoma in teens, but the risk of NHL goes up as people get older. There are many types of NHL. Some of the types seen more often in adolescents tend to grow quickly and require intense treatment, but they also tend to respond better to treatment than NHL in older adults.
Leukemia
Leukemias are cancers of the bone marrow and blood. They are the most common cancers in children, but they can occur at any age. In fact, most leukemias occur in older adults.
Leukemias in adolescents are usually acute (fast growing) types such as acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) or acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Leukemia can cause tiredness, weakness, pale skin, bleeding or bruising, fever, weight loss, bone and joint pain, and other symptoms. Acute leukemias can grow quickly, so they need to be treated as soon as they are found.  
The outlook for most acute leukemias tends to be better the younger a patient is.
Thyroid cancer
The risk of thyroid cancer tends to go up as people get older, but it’s found more often in younger people than most other adult cancers. It’s also much more common in young women than in young men.
The most common symptom of thyroid cancer is a lump in the front of the neck. Most thyroid lumps are not cancer, but it’s important to have them checked to be sure. Other symptoms of thyroid cancer can include pain or swelling in the neck, trouble breathing or swallowing, and voice changes.
The chance of curing thyroid cancers is usually very good.
Brain and spinal cord tumors
There are many types of brain and spinal cord tumors, and the treatment and outlook for each is different.
In children, most brain tumors start in the lower parts of the brain, such as the cerebellum (which coordinates movement) or brain stem (which connects the brain to the spinal cord). Adults are more likely to develop tumors in upper parts of the brain. Tumors in adolescents can occur in either area.
Spinal cord tumors are less common than brain tumors in all age groups. These tumors can cause numbness, weakness, or loss of coordination in the arms or legs (usually on both sides of the body), as well as bladder or bowel problems.
Testicular cancer
Testicular cancer most often develops in young men. About half of testicular cancers occur in men between the ages of 20 and 34, but it can occur at any age, including in teens.
Most often, the first symptom of testicular cancer is a lump on the testicle, or the testicle becomes swollen or larger. Some testicular tumors might cause pain, but most of the time they do not. It’s important to have any lumps checked by a doctor as soon as possible so that the cause can be found.
In general, the outlook for testicular cancers is very good, and most of these cancers can be cured.
Sarcoma (bone or soft tissue cancer)
Sarcomas are cancers that start in connective tissues such as muscles, bones, or fat cells. There are 2 main types of sarcoma:

Bone sarcomas
Soft tissue sarcomas (which start in muscles, fat, blood vessels or other some body tissues)

Sarcomas can develop at any age, but some types occur most often in older children and teens.
Bone sarcomas: The 2 most common types of bone cancer, osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma, are most common in teens. They often cause bone pain that gets worse at night or with activity. They can also cause swelling in the area around the bone.
Osteosarcoma usually starts in areas where the bone is growing quickly, such as near the ends of the leg or arm bones. The most common places for Ewing sarcoma to start are the pelvic (hip) bones, the chest wall (such as the ribs or shoulder blades), or in the middle of the leg bones.
Soft tissue sarcomas: These cancers can start in any part of the body, but they often develop in the arms or legs. Rhabdomyosarcoma, a cancer that starts in cells that normally develop into skeletal muscles, is most common in children younger than 10, but it can also develop in teens and adults. Most other types of soft tissue sarcomas become more common as people age. Symptoms depend on where the sarcoma starts, and can include lumps (which might or might not cause pain), swelling, or bowel problems.
Melanoma
Although melanoma is more likely to occur in older adults, it is also found in people younger than 30 (especially younger women). Melanoma that runs in families can occur at a younger age.
The most important warning sign for melanoma is a new spot on the skin or a spot that’s changing in size, shape, or color. A spot that looks different from all of the others on your skin can also be a warning and should be checked by a doctor.
The chance of curing a melanoma is often very good if it’s found and treated early. But if left alone, it can often grow and spread quickly, which can make it much harder to treat.
Ovarian cancer
Overall, ovarian cancer is much more common in older women. But some types of ovarian cancers, known as germ cell tumors, are more common in teens and young women.
Early ovarian cancer usually does not cause symptoms, but some teens and young women might feel full quickly when eating or have abnormal bloating, belly pain, or urinary symptoms. If such symptoms last more than a few weeks, they should be checked by a doctor.How common is cancer in adolescents?

About 5,290 adolescents (aged 15 to 19) are diagnosed with cancer each year in the United States.
About 550 adolescents die from cancer each year. Cancer is the fourth leading cause of death in this age group, behind only accidents, suicide, and homicide.

Survival rates for adolescents with cancer
The chance of getting cancer is about equal for teen boys and girls, but cancer survival rates are slightly higher in girls than in boys.
Overall, about 90% of girls are still alive 5 years after being diagnosed with cancer, compared to about 83% of boys. Some of this might be because of different mixes of cancer types in males and females. Survival rates can vary based on the type of cancer and other factors.
The overall survival rate for cancer in teens has not improved as much in the past few decades as it has for cancers in children, although current overall survival rates are similar. As with cancers in children, the progress in some cancers in adolescents has been greater than in others.
Visit the American Cancer Society’s Cancer Statistics Center for more key statistics.A risk factor is anything that increases a person's chances of getting a disease such as cancer. Different cancers have different risk factors.
In older adults, many cancers are linked to lifestyle-related risk factors such as smoking, being overweight, eating an unhealthy diet, not getting enough exercise, and drinking too much alcohol. Exposures to things in the environment, such as radon, air pollution, asbestos, or radiation during medical tests or procedures, also play a role in some adult cancers. These types of risk factors usually take many years to influence cancer risk, so they are not thought to play much of a role in cancers in children or teens.
Cancer occurs as a result of changes (mutations) in the genes inside our cells. Genes, which are made of DNA, control nearly everything our cells do. Some genes affect when our cells grow, divide into new cells, and die. Changes in these genes can cause cells to grow out of control, which can sometimes lead to cancer.
Some people inherit gene mutations from a parent that increase their risk of certain cancers. In people who inherit such a mutation, this can sometimes lead to cancer earlier in life than would normally be expected. But most cancers are not caused by inherited gene changes.
We know some of the causes of gene changes that can lead to adult cancers (such as the lifestyle-related and environmental risk factors mentioned above), but the reasons for gene changes that cause most cancers in teens are not known. Many are likely to just be random events that sometimes happen inside a cell, without having an outside cause.
Still, there are some known causes of cancer in teens. For instance:

Exposure to ultraviolet (UV) light from the sun or from tanning beds can increase the risk of melanoma.
Treatment with chemotherapy or radiation therapy for a childhood cancer can increase the risk of getting a second cancer, especially leukemia, later on.
Infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) can raise the risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma and some other cancers.

Still, these and other known risk factors probably account for only a small portion of cancers in teens overall.Most cancers in teens do not have a known cause, so it’s not possible to prevent all of them. But some can be prevented.
Limiting lifestyle-related and environmental risk factors
Unlike with many cancers in older adults, lifestyle-related risk factors (such as smoking) are not thought to play much of a role in cancers in teens. A few environmental factors, such as radiation exposure, have been linked with cancer risk in teens. But some exposures may be unavoidable, such as if a child needs radiation therapy to treat cancer.
There are some things you can do to lower your risk of getting certain kinds of cancer, such as:

Not smoking
Limiting time spent in the sun and avoiding tanning salons
Limiting the number of sex partners and using safe sex practices, which can lower the risk of some infections linked to cancer, such as human papilloma virus (HPV) and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)

While lifestyle-related and environmental risk factors don’t have a large effect on cancers in teens, exposure to these risk factors during the teenage years can still increase a person’s risk of getting cancer as they get older. It’s important to develop and maintain healthy habits early in life, such as not smoking, staying at a healthy weight, keeping active, and eating a healthy diet. Healthy habits like these can also lower your risk for many other types of health problems later on.
Vaccines to help prevent cancer
Some vaccines might lower a person’s risk of getting cancer. For instance, a vaccine series is available to help prevent infection with HPV (human papillomavirus), the group of viruses linked to cervical and 5 other cancers. Even though these cancers are more likely to develop later in life, these vaccines work best if they are given between age 9 and 12. Children and young adults age 13 to 26 who have not yet received the HPV vaccine, or who haven't gotten all their doses, should get vaccinated as soon as possible. For more information, see HPV Vaccines and HPV and Cancer.
Vaccines can also help prevent hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection. Chronic infection with HBV is linked with an increased risk of liver cancer later in life.
Preventive surgery
Rarely, people inherit gene mutations that make them very likely to get certain kinds of cancer at an early age. In such cases, some people and their doctors might decide on surgery to remove an organ before cancer has a chance to develop there. Again, this is not common.Cancers are often found later (at a more advanced stage) in teens than they are in other age groups. There are a number of reasons the diagnosis of cancer might be delayed:

Most teens tend to be fairly healthy and might not go to the doctor unless they feel they really need to. This is especially true for young men.
These years are often a time of growing independence, when young people begin to establish their own identity and lifestyle. Concerns other than health, such as spending time with friends, dating, working, or getting ready for college are often higher priority than health at this time. Many teens might not even have a regular doctor.
Even when a young person does go to the doctor with symptoms, cancer is not usually high on the list of probable causes because it’s not common in this age group. Doctors might be more likely to think symptoms like pain or feeling tired are due to causes other than cancer.

Still, some cancers in teens can be found early, when treatment is more likely to be successful.
Screening for cancers in teens
Screening is testing for a disease such as cancer in people who don’t have any symptoms. Cancers are not common between ages 15 and 19, so there are no widely recommended screening tests to look for cancer in people in this age group who are not at increased risk.
Some people have a higher risk of developing certain types of cancer because of a strong family history or because they've inherited a specific gene mutation from a parent. These might put a person at higher risk for cancers such as melanoma of the skin or colorectal, thyroid, or other cancers. People with these mutations may need careful, regular exams or tests starting at an early age to look for signs of cancer.
Possible signs and symptoms of cancer in teens
There are many reasons cancers in teens and young adults might not be recognized right away. Sometimes the early symptoms of cancer can overlap with those from much more common illnesses or injuries. Young people might feel run down, get sick, or have bumps or bruises that could mask the early signs of cancer. But it’s important to be aware of the common signs and symptoms of cancer. These can include:

An unusual lump or swelling in the neck, belly, testicle, or elsewhere
Unexplained tiredness and loss of energy
Easy bruising
Abnormal bleeding
Ongoing pain in one part of the body
Unexplained fever or illness that doesn’t go away
Frequent headaches, often with vomiting
Sudden eye or vision changes
Loss of appetite or unplanned weight loss
A new mole or other spot on the skin, or one that changes in size, shape, or color

Other symptoms are also possible, depending on the type of cancer. See Types of Cancers that Develop in Adolescents. for more information on common symptoms for specific cancers.
Many of these symptoms are much more likely to be caused by something other than cancer. Still, if a teen has any of these symptoms – especially if they don’t go away or they get worse – it's important to have them checked by a doctor.
Seeing a doctor
The doctor will ask about medical history and symptoms and will then do a physical exam. Depending on the symptoms, special types of exams or tests might be needed. The doctor might order blood tests, imaging tests (like x-rays and CT scans), or other tests to help figure out if the symptoms are caused by cancer or something else.
If the doctor thinks the symptoms might be caused by cancer, your teen will probably be referred to a specialist for more exams and tests. The type of doctor will depend on your child's age and what type of cancer is suspected.
In some cases, if an abnormal lump or tumor is found, the doctor might need to remove some or all of it so that it can be checked for cancer cells with a microscope. This is known as a biopsy. For most types of cancer, a biopsy is needed to confirm the diagnosis. Biopsies can be done in many ways, ranging from removing a small sample of cells with a thin, hollow needle, to more extensive surgery. The type of biopsy used will depend on where the lump or tumor is and other factors.Older people are much more likely than younger people to get cancer, so most oncologists (doctors who treat cancer) see mainly older adults. Some doctors (pediatric oncologists) specialize in treating childhood cancers. Each type of doctor tends to work in an office or cancer center geared toward treating either older adults or children. There are very few doctors who focus specifically on teens (or young adults) with cancer, so it’s not always clear which type of doctor (or treatment center) might be best. It often depends on the patient’s age and the type of cancer.

Cancers in teens that are more common in children, such as acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL), bone sarcomas (osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma) and rhabdomyosarcoma, are often best treated by pediatric oncologists, who have more experience with these types of cancer.
On the other hand, teens with “adult” cancers, such as melanoma or thyroid cancer, might benefit from doctors who treat older adults and see these types of cancers more often.

Doctors tend to use more intense treatments when treating children with cancer than when treating adults. Children’s bodies are often better able to recover from more intense treatments (such as higher doses of chemo) than are adults’ bodies. And childhood cancers often respond better to chemo. This is because they tend to be cancers that grow quickly, and chemo works better against fast-growing cancers.
For some cancers (especially childhood cancers like ALL and bone sarcomas), the more aggressive treatments used for children have been found to improve outcomes for teens as well, but for other cancers the results are not as clear. Again, this can depend on the patient’s age and the type of cancer.
Types of cancer treatments
The main types of treatment for cancers in teens are the same as those used in other age groups. The choice of treatment depends mainly on the type and stage (extent) of the cancer. Sometimes more than one type of treatment is used.
It’s important to discuss all treatment options, including their goals and possible side effects, with your teen's doctors to help make the decision that best fits your needs.
Surgery
Surgery is a common treatment, especially for early- stage cancers. The type of surgery depends on the type, size, and location of the cancer.
Teens have some advantages when it comes to surgery in that they usually have fewer health problems than older adults, and there are fewer concerns about anesthesia than there are with younger children. (Anesthesia is the use of drugs or gases to put you into a deep sleep so you won't feel pain.) But teens’ bodies are often still growing, so in some cases they can be affected more by surgery than older adults.
Radiation therapy
Radiation therapy is the use of high-energy rays (such as x-rays) or particles to kill cancer cells.
Teens are less likely to have major side effects from radiation than younger children because their bodies are no longer growing as quickly. But some parts of the body, such as the breast, ovaries, or testicles, can still be very sensitive to the effects of radiation if they are still developing. Radiation can cause some late or long-term side effects years later. These are discussed in Late and Long-term Effects of Cancer Treatment in Adolescents.
Chemotherapy and targeted drugs
Chemotherapy (chemo) is the use of drugs to treat cancer. Some drugs can be swallowed in pill form, while others are injected into a vein or muscle. Chemo is often used to treat cancers that have spread, but it can also be used for some earlier stage cancers (usually along with other treatments).
Chemo drugs can cause side effects because they affect cells that are dividing quickly. Teens can usually withstand higher doses of chemo than older adults, but these higher doses can also cause more short- and long-term side effects.
For some types of cancer, newer targeted therapy drugs can be used instead of or along with standard chemo drugs. These drugs work by attacking certain parts of cancer cells (or nearby cells) that help them grow. Targeted drugs sometimes work when standard chemo drugs don’t, and they have different (and often less severe) side effects.
Immunotherapy
Immunotherapy is treatment that helps the body's own immune system fight the cancer. Some types of immunotherapy are now an important part of treating certain cancers, such as melanomas. Newer types of immunotherapy are also showing promise against other cancer types.
Stem cell transplant
A stem cell transplant, also known as a bone marrow transplant, is a way for doctors to give very high doses of chemo (sometimes along with radiation therapy). It’s an option for treating some cancers, usually if other treatments are not working.
Without a stem cell transplant, the chemo drug doses are limited because it could severely damage the bone marrow, where new blood cells are made. This could lead to life-threatening infections, bleeding, and other problems because of low blood cell counts.
When a stem cell transplant is done, blood-forming stem cells are first collected from the blood of either the patient or from a matched stem cell donor using a special machine. The stem cells are kept frozen while the patient gets very high doses of chemo (and sometimes radiation) to kill the cancer cells. Afterwards, the stem cells are infused into a vein much like a blood transfusion. They settle in the bone marrow and start making new blood cells over the next few weeks.
A stem cell transplant is a complex treatment that can cause serious, sometimes even life-threatening side effects. It often requires a lengthy hospital stay and can cost a lot. It’s important to understand the possible benefits, risks, and costs of this procedure if it’s an option.
The cancer treatment team
Teens with cancer may have different types of doctors on their treatment team, depending on the type and stage of the cancer and their treatment options. These doctors can include:

Cancer surgeons (sometimes called surgical oncologists): doctors who use surgery to treat cancer. Surgeons often specialize in treating a certain part of the body or a body system (such as the bones and muscles, the reproductive system or the digestive system).
Medical oncologists: doctors who use chemotherapy and other medicines to treat adults with cancer
Pediatric oncologists: doctors who use medicines to treat children and teens with cancer
Radiation oncologists: doctors who use radiation to treat cancer
Nurse practitioners (NPs) and physician assistants (PAs): nurses and other health professionals who are specially trained and licensed to practice medicine alongside doctors

Many other health professionals might be part of the cancer team as well, including:

Nurses
Rehabilitation and physical therapists
Nutritionists
Social workers
Other health professionals

These specialists can provide help and guidance with many issues facing teens and their families, such as treatment effects on fertility, education or employment needs, health insurance concerns, and financial issues.
Clinical trials
Clinical trials are carefully controlled research studies that are done with patients who volunteer for them. They are used to learn more about promising new treatments or procedures.
Clinical trials are one way to get state-of-the art cancer treatment. Sometimes they may be the only way to get some newer treatments. They are also the best way for doctors to learn better ways to treat cancer. Still, they might not be right for everyone.
Children’s cancer centers often conduct many clinical trials at any one time, and most children treated at these centers take part in a clinical trial as part of their treatment. This is one of the reasons why there has been great progress in treating many childhood cancers in recent decades.
Overall, teens are less likely than younger children to take part in clinical trials. There are many reasons for this, including the many different cancer types and treatment settings, lack of knowledge about clinical trials (from both doctors and patients), patient/family reluctance to enter clinical trials, and financial issues. Unfortunately, many experts believe this low enrollment in clinical trials is one of the main reasons for the lack of progress in treating cancers in teens.
If you would like to learn more about clinical trials that might be right for you (or your child), start by asking your doctor if your clinic or hospital conducts clinical trials. See Clinical Trials to learn more.Teens who have had cancer might be at risk for long-term effects from the cancer or its treatment, as well as for effects that might not show up until many years later (known as late effects). It’s important to discuss what these possible effects might be with the medical team.
The risks depend on a number of factors, such as:

The type of cancer
The types and doses of treatments used
The person’s age when getting treatment

Some organs and body systems can still be growing and developing in teens, which can make them more sensitive to treatments like chemo and radiation therapy.
Late effects can involve more than one part of the body (or more than one organ system), and they can range from mild to severe. They might include:

Impaired fertility (ability to have children)
Increased risk of developing another cancer later in life
Heart or lung problems (from certain chemo drugs or radiation to the chest)
Hearing or vision problems (from certain chemo drugs or radiation to the head)
Problems with other organs, such as the kidneys or bones
Pain or swelling in parts of the body
Hormone deficiencies

Just as the treatment of cancer in teens requires a specialized approach, so does aftercare and watching for late effects. Careful follow-up after cancer treatment allows doctors to find and treat any late effects as early as possible. The follow-up schedule depends on many things, including the type of cancer, the treatments used, and the risk of late effects from those treatments.
It’s very important to discuss possible long-term complications of treatment with the health care team, and to make sure there’s a plan to watch for these problems and treat them, if needed. The health care team can help you know what to watch for.
The Children’s Oncology Group (COG) is the world’s largest group of doctors and other health professionals devoted to treating cancer in children and teens. To help raise awareness of late effects of cancer treatment and improve follow-up care of childhood and teen cancer survivors throughout their lives, the COG has developed long-term follow-up guidelines for these survivors. The guidelines can help you know what to watch for, what type of screening tests should be done to look for problems, and how late effects can be treated.
To learn more, ask your doctors about the COG survivor guidelines. You can also find them online at www.survivorshipguidelines.org. The guidelines are written for health care professionals, but patient versions of some of the guidelines are available, too (as Health Links).
The National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN), a collection of many of the nation’s leading cancer centers, also has follow-up test recommendations for teen and young adult cancer survivors. While the guidelines are written for health professionals, a patient version (which includes information on many aspects of being diagnosed with cancer as a teen) is available at  https://www.nccn.org/patientresources/patient-resources/guidelines-for-patients.
It’s certainly normal to want to put the cancer and its treatment behind you and get back to a life that doesn’t revolve around cancer. But it’s very important to understand that continued follow-up with your health care team is a key part of this process and offers the best chance for a full recovery and long-term survival.Teens with cancer and their families face many challenges, from the first onset of symptoms through treatment and beyond.
Delays in diagnosis
Cancers in teens and young adults are often found later than they are in other age groups. See Finding Cancer in Adolescents.) Sometimes this can complicate treatment if the cancer has grown large or spread by the time it’s found.
Treatment issues
For teens with cancer, sometimes it’s not clear if they’re best treated by doctors who specialize in treating children with cancer (pediatric oncologists) or by doctors who mainly treat older adults (oncologists). Not all doctors are familiar with treating cancers in teens, which can often have unusual features.
Communication between patients and their doctors can also be an issue, as many cancer doctors are more comfortable dealing with other age groups.
Regardless of where they are being treated, teens and young adults can feel isolated and out of place. Most patients in doctor’s offices or cancer centers are either older adults or younger children, so teens aren’t likely to see many people their own age who are dealing with the same issues they are. It’s very important for people to be able to connect with others who understand what they’re going through and can relate to them on their level. Many support groups – both in person and online – now exist for teens with cancer who are looking to connect with others in similar situations.
Some teens themselves can be challenging as patients. They might place a higher priority on other things going on in their lives rather than treating the cancer, resulting in missed appointments for tests or treatments. This might be out of a misunderstanding of the seriousness of the cancer, resentment over having to deal with the cancer, or even fear of the unknown.
Social and emotional issues
Some of the greatest challenges faced by teens with cancer come from the fact that this tends to be a time of great change in a person’s life, which comes with many of its own stresses. Teens are often establishing their own identities at this time and developing social, emotional, and financial independence. A diagnosis of cancer can throw all of these things into disarray.
During treatment, patients and their families tend to focus on the daily aspects of getting through it and beating the cancer. But a number of emotional concerns can come up both during and after treatment. Some of these might last a long time. They can include things like:

Dealing with physical changes (hair loss, weight gain, scars from surgery, etc.) that can result from the cancer or its treatment
Worrying about the cancer returning or developing new health problems
Resenting having cancer and having to go through treatment when others do not
Having to become more reliant on parents at a time when a person is normally becoming more independent
Having concerns about what to tell others or being treated differently or discriminated against (by friends, classmates, co-workers, employers, etc.)
Having concerns about dating and someday marrying and having children

No one would choose to have cancer, but for many cancer survivors, the experience can be positive in the long term, allowing for clearer setting of priorities and helping to establish strong personal values. Still, some survivors may have a harder time recovering, adjusting to life after cancer, and moving on.
It’s normal to have some anxiety or other emotional reactions after treatment, but feeling overly worried, depressed, or angry can affect many aspects of a young person’s growth. It can get in the way of relationships, school, work, and other parts of life. With support from family, friends, mental health professionals, and others, many cancer survivors can thrive in spite of the challenges they’ve had to face.