Cervical cancer starts in the cells lining the cervix -- the lower part of the uterus (womb). The cervix connects the body of the uterus (the upper part where a fetus grows) to the vagina (birth canal). Cancer starts when cells in the body begin to grow out of control. To learn more about how cancers start and spread, see What Is Cancer?
The cervix is made of two parts and is covered with two different types of cells.

The endocervix is the opening of the cervix that leads into the uterus. It is covered with glandular cells.
The exocervix (or ectocervix) is the outer part of the cervix that can be seen by the doctor during a speculum exam. It is covered in squamous cells.

The place where these two cell types meet in the cervix is called the transformation zone. The exact location of the transformation zone changes as you get older and if you give birth. Most cervical cancers begin in the cells in the transformation zone.How common is cervical cancer?
The American Cancer Society's estimates for cervical cancer in the United States for 2024 are:

About 13,820 new cases of invasive cervical cancer will be diagnosed.
About 4,360 women will die from cervical cancer.

Cervical pre-cancers are diagnosed far more often than invasive cervical cancer.﻿
Cervical cancer is most frequently diagnosed in women between the ages of 35 and 44, with the average age being 50. It rarely develops in women younger than 20.
Many older women don't realize that they are still at risk of developing cervical cancer as they age. More than 20% of cervical cancers are found in women over 65. However, these cancers rarely occur in women who have been getting regular tests to screen for cervical cancer before they were 65. See Can Cervical Cancer Be Prevented? and Cervical Cancer Screening Tests to learn more about tests used to screen for cervical cancer.
Incidence rates for cervical cancer
Cervical cancer incidence rates decreased by more than half from the mid-1970s to the mid-2000s, largely because of the increased use of screening, but they have stabilized over the past decade. However, in women ages 30-44, rates have increased 1.7% each year from 2012 to 2019.
In contrast, rates declined 11% each year for women ages 20-24, probably reflecting the first signs of cancer prevention from HPV vaccination.
Mortality rates for cervical cancer
Cervical cancer was once one of the most common causes of cancer death for American women. The cervical cancer death rate has dropped by more than half since the mid-1970s because of prevention and screening, although rates have stabilized in recent years. The death rate in Black women and Native American women is about 65% higher than in White women. 
 
Visit the American Cancer Society’s Cancer Statistics Center for more key statistics.New ways to prevent and treat cancer of the cervix are being researched. Some of the promising new developments include the following:
Sentinel lymph node biopsy (SNLB)
During surgery for cervical cancer, lymph nodes in the pelvis may be removed to check to see if the cancer has spread. Instead of removing many lymph nodes, a technique called sentinel lymph node biopsy can be used to target just the few lymph nodes most likely to contain cancer. In this technique, a blue dye containing a radioactive tracer is injected into the cancer and allowed to drain into lymph nodes. Then, during surgery, the lymph nodes that contain radiation and the blue dye can be identified and removed. These are the lymph nodes most likely to contain cancer if it has spread. If these lymph nodes don’t contain cancer, the other lymph nodes don’t need to be removed. Removing fewer lymph nodes may lower the risk of later problems, such as lymphedema (swelling) of the legs.
At this time, SLNB is used mainly in stage I cervical cancers smaller than 2 cm. More studies are planned to see if this procedure should become part of the standard treatment.
Immunotherapy
In cancer, the immune system cannot control the fast growth of tumor cells. Recently, new drugs called immune checkpoint inhibitors have been developed that “reset” the immune system. They have been found to be useful in treating a number of types of cancer. Their helpfulness in cervical cancer treatment is just being discovered, and clinical trials are underway to find out more. One immunotherapy drug is currently available to treat advanced cervical cancer, but studies are being done to see if this or other immunotherapy drugs would work better in combination with chemotherapy or possibly in combination with chemoradiation.
HPV vaccines
Vaccines have been developed to prevent infection with some of the high risk HPV types  that are associated with cervical cancer. Currently available vaccines are intended to produce immunity to HPV types that cause about 90% of cervical cancers.
Other vaccines are meant to help women who already have advanced cervical cancer. These vaccines attempt to produce an immune reaction to the parts of the virus (E6 and E7 proteins) that make the cervical cancer cells grow abnormally. It is hoped that this reaction will kill the cancer cells or stop them from growing. Studies in advanced cervical cancer showed promising results with a vaccine against the E7 protein (ADXS11-001): tumors shrank or disease stabilized. It is also being studied in early-stage cervical cancer to see if it can help decrease the chance of the cancer returning. Other types of vaccines against the E6 or E7 proteins are also being tested.
Targeted therapy
As researchers have learned more about the gene changes in cells that cause cancer, they have been able to develop new drugs that specifically target these changes. These targeted drugs work differently from standard chemotherapy drugs. They often have side effects different from those in chemotherapy.
Bevacizumab is a targeted agent currently used to treat advanced cervical cancer. Other targeted drugs, such as cediranib and nintedanib, that block certain growth factors that help cancer cells grow have shown to be helpful in some early studies of patients with advanced cervical cancer. These drugs continue to be studied.A risk factor is anything that increases your chance of getting a disease such as cancer. Different cancers have different risk factors. For example, exposing skin to strong sunlight is a risk factor for skin cancer. Smoking is a risk factor for many cancers. But having a risk factor, or even several, does not mean that you will get the disease.
Several risk factors can increase your chance of developing cervical cancer. People without any of these risk factors rarely develop cervical cancer. Although these risk factors can increase the odds of developing cervical cancer, many with these risks do not develop this disease.
When you think about risk factors, it helps to focus on those you can change or avoid (like smoking or human papillomavirus infection), rather than those you cannot (such as your age and family history). However, it is still important to know about risk factors that cannot be changed, because it's even more important for those who have these factors to get regular screening tests to find cervical cancer early.
Risk factors you can possibly change
Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection
Infection by the human papillomavirus (HPV) is the most important risk factor for cervical cancer. HPV is a group of more than 150 related viruses. Some of them cause a type of growth called papillomas, which are more commonly known as warts.

HPV can infect cells on the surface of the skin, and those lining the genitals, anus, mouth and throat, but not the blood or internal organs such as the heart or lungs.
HPV can spread from one person to another during skin-to-skin contact. One way HPV spreads is through sexual activity, including vaginal, anal, and even oral sex.
Different types of HPV cause warts on different parts of the body. Some cause common warts on the hands and feet; others tend to cause warts on the lips or tongue.

Certain types of HPV may cause warts on or around the female and male genital organs and in the anal area. These are called low-risk types of HPV because they are seldom linked to cancer.
Other types of HPV are called high-risk types because they are strongly linked to cancers, including cancer of the cervix, vulva, and vagina in women, penile cancer in men, and cancers of the anus, mouth, and throat in both men and women. 
Infection with HPV is common, and in most people the body can clear the infection by itself. Sometimes, however, the infection does not go away and becomes chronic. Chronic infection, especially when it is caused by certain high-risk HPV types, can eventually cause certain cancers, such as cervical cancer.
Although there is currently no cure for HPV infection, there are ways to treat the warts and abnormal cell growth that HPV causes. Also, HPV vaccines are available to help prevent infection by certain types of HPV and some of the cancers linked to those types.
For more information on this topic, see HPV.
Sexual history
Several factors related to your sexual history can increase the risk of cervical cancer. The risk is most likely affected by increasing the chances of exposure to HPV.

Becoming sexually active at a young age (especially younger than 18 years old)
Having many sexual partners
Having one partner who is considered high risk (someone with HPV infection or who has many sexual partners)

Smoking
When someone smokes, they and those around them are exposed to many cancer-causing chemicals that affect organs other than the lungs. These harmful substances are absorbed through the lungs and carried in the bloodstream throughout the body.
Women who smoke are about twice as likely as those who don't smoke to get cervical cancer. Tobacco by-products have been found in the cervical mucus of women who smoke. Researchers believe that these substances damage the DNA of cervix cells and may contribute to the development of cervical cancer. Smoking also makes the immune system less effective in fighting HPV infections.
Having a weakened immune system
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the virus that causes AIDS, weakens the immune system and puts people at higher risk for HPV infections.
The immune system is important in destroying cancer cells and slowing their growth and spread. In women with HIV, a cervical pre-cancer might develop into an invasive cancer faster than it normally would.
Another group of women at risk for cervical cancer are those taking drugs to suppress their immune response, such as those being treated for an autoimmune disease (in which the immune system sees the body's own tissues as foreign and attacks them, as it would a germ) or those who have had an organ transplant.
Chlamydia infection
Chlamydia is a relatively common kind of bacteria that can infect the reproductive system. It is spread by sexual contact. Women who are infected with chlamydia often have no symptoms and they may not know that they are infected at all unless they are tested during a pelvic exam. Chlamydia infection can cause pelvic inflammation, leading to infertility.
Some studies have seen a higher risk of cervical cancer in women whose blood tests and cervical mucus showed evidence of past or current chlamydia infection. Certain studies show that the Chlamydia bacteria may help HPV grow and live on in the cervix which may increase the risk of cervical cancer.  
Long-term use of oral contraceptives (birth control pills)
There is evidence that taking oral contraceptives (OCs) for a long time increases the risk of cancer of the cervix. Research suggests that the risk of cervical cancer goes up the longer a woman takes OCs, but the risk goes back down again after the OCs are stopped, and returns to normal many years after stopping.
A woman and her doctor should discuss whether the benefits of using OCs outweigh the potential risks. 
Having multiple full-term pregnancies
Women who have had 3 or more full-term pregnancies have an increased risk of developing cervical cancer. It is thought this is probably due to the increased exposure to HPV infection with sexual activity. Also, studies have pointed to hormonal changes during pregnancy as possibly making women more susceptible to HPV infection or cancer growth. Another thought is that pregnant women might have weaker immune systems, allowing for HPV infection and cancer growth. 
Young age at first full-term pregnancy
Women who were younger than 20 years when they had their first full-term pregnancy are more likely to get cervical cancer later in life than women who waited to get pregnant until they were 25 years or older. 
Economic status
Many low-income women do not have easy access to adequate health care services, including cervical cancer screening with Pap tests and HPV tests. This means they may not get screened or treated for cervical pre-cancers. 
A diet low in fruits and vegetables
Women whose diets don’t include enough fruits and vegetables may be at increased risk for cervical cancer.
Risk factors that cannot be changed
Diethylstilbestrol (DES)
DES is a hormonal drug that was given to some women between 1938 and 1971 to prevent miscarriage. Women whose mothers took DES (when pregnant with them) develop clear-cell adenocarcinoma of the vagina or cervix more often than would normally be expected. These types of cancer are extremely rare in women who haven’t been exposed to DES. There is about 1 case of vaginal or cervical clear-cell adenocarcinoma in every 1,000 women whose mothers took DES during pregnancy. This means that about 99.9% of "DES daughters" do not develop these cancers.
DES-related clear cell adenocarcinoma is more common in the vagina than the cervix. The risk appears to be greatest in women whose mothers took the drug during their first 16 weeks of pregnancy. The average age of women diagnosed with DES-related clear-cell adenocarcinoma is 19 years. Since the use of DES during pregnancy was stopped by the FDA in 1971, even the youngest DES daughters are older than 40 − past the age of highest risk. Still, there is no age cut-off when these women are felt to be safe from DES-related cancer. Doctors do not know exactly how long these women will remain at risk.
DES daughters may also be at increased risk of developing squamous cell cancers and pre-cancers of the cervix linked to HPV. 
You can learn more in DES Exposure: Questions and Answers. Read it on our website, or call (1-800-227-2345) to have a free copy sent to you.
Having a family history of cervical cancer
Cervical cancer may run in some families. If your mother or sister had cervical cancer, your chances of developing the disease are higher than if no one in the family had it. Some researchers suspect that some rare instances of this familial tendency are caused by an inherited condition that makes some women less able to fight off HPV infection than others. In other instances, women in the same family as a patient already diagnosed could be more likely to have one or more of the other non-genetic risk factors previously described in this section. 
Factors that may lower your risk
Intrauterine device ( IUD) use
Some research suggests that women who had ever used an intrauterine device (IUD) had a lower risk of cervical cancer. The effect on risk was seen even in women who had an IUD for less than a year, and the protective effect remained after the IUDs were removed.
IUDs do have some risks. A woman interested in using an IUD should first discuss the possible risks and benefits with her doctor. Also, a woman with multiple sexual partners should use condoms to lower her risk of sexually transmitted illnesses no matter what other form of contraception she uses.In recent years, there has been a lot of progress in understanding what happens in cells of the cervix when cancer develops. In addition, several risk factors have been identified that increase the odds that a woman might develop cervical cancer (see Risk Factors for Cervical Cancer).
The development of normal human cells mostly depends on the information contained in the cells’ DNA. DNA is the chemical in our cells that makes up our genes, which control how our cells work. We look like our parents because they are the source of our DNA. But DNA affects more than just how we look.
Some genes control when cells grow, divide, and die:· 

Genes that help cells grow, divide, and stay alive are called oncogenes.
Genes that help keep cell growth under control or make cells die at the right time are called tumor suppressor genes.

Cancers can be caused by DNA mutations (gene defects) that turn on oncogenes or turn off tumor suppressor genes.
Human papillomaviruses (HPV) have two proteins known as E6 and E7 which turn off some tumor suppressor genes, such as p53 and Rb. This may allow the cells lining the cervix to grow too much and to develop changes in additional genes, which in some cases can lead to cancer.
But HPV is not the only cause of cervical cancer. Most women with HPV don’t get cervical cancer, and other risk factors, like smoking and HIV infection, influence which women exposed to HPV are more likely to develop cervical cancer.The two most important things you can do to prevent cervical cancer are to get the HPV vaccine if you are eligible, and to be tested regularly according to American Cancer Society (ACS) guidelines. These can be found in The American Cancer Society Guidelines for the Prevention and Early Detection of Cervical Cancer.
The most common form of cervical cancer starts with pre-cancerous changes and there are ways to stop this from developing. The first way is to find and treat pre-cancers before they become invasive cancers, and the second is to prevent the pre-cancers.
Finding cervical pre-cancers
A well-proven way to prevent cervical cancer is to have screening tests. Screening is having tests to find conditions that may lead to cancers and can find pre-cancers before they can turn into invasive cancer. The Pap test (or Pap smear) and the human papillomavirus (HPV) test are specific tests used during screening for cervical cancer. These tests are done the same way. A health professional uses a special tool to gently scrape or brush the cervix to remove cells for testing. If a pre-cancer is found it can be treated, keeping it from turning into a cervical cancer.
The HPV test looks for infection by high-risk types of HPV that are more likely to cause pre-cancers and cancers of the cervix. There are certain HPV tests approved to be a primary HPV test and others approved as part of a co-test.  The type you get most often depends on which test is available in your area.
The Pap test or smear is a procedure used to collect cells from the cervix so that they can be looked at closely in the lab to find cancer and pre-cancer. It's important to know that most invasive cervical cancers are found in women who have not had regular Pap tests. A Pap test can be done during a pelvic exam, but not all pelvic exams include a Pap test.
The result of the HPV test, along with your past test results, determines your risk of developing cervical cancer. If the test is positive, this could mean more follow-up visits, more tests to look for a pre-cancer or cancer, and sometimes a procedure to treat any pre-cancers that might be found.
It is best to talk to your healthcare provider about your screening test results in more detail to fully understand your risk of developing cervical cancer and next steps.
Things to do to prevent pre-cancers and cancers
Based on your age, overall health, and personal risk for cervical cancer, there are some things that can be done that may prevent pre-cancers and conditions that lead to pre-cancers.
Get an HPV vaccine
Vaccines are available that can help protect children and young adults against certain HPV infections. These vaccines protect against infection with the HPV types most commonly linked to cancer, as well as some types that can cause anal and genital warts.
These vaccines only work to prevent HPV infection − they will not treat an infection that is already there. That is why, to be most effective, the HPV vaccines should be given before a person becomes exposed to HPV (such as through sexual activity).
These vaccines help prevent pre-cancers and cancers of the cervix. Some HPV vaccines are also approved to help prevent other types of cancers and anal and genital warts.
The vaccines require a series of injections (shots). Side effects are usually mild. The most common ones are short-term redness, swelling, and soreness at the injection site. Rarely, a young person might faint shortly after the injection.
The ACS recommends:

HPV vaccination of children between the ages of 9 and 12. 
Children and young adults age 13 through 26 who have not been vaccinated, or who haven’t gotten all their doses, should get the vaccine as soon as possible.Vaccination of young adults will not prevent as many cancers as vaccination of children and teens.
The ACS does not recommend HPV vaccination for persons older than 26 years.

It’s important to know that no vaccine provides complete protection against all cancer-causing types of HPV, so routine cervical cancer screening is still needed.
For more information on the vaccine and HPV, please see HPV Vaccines.
Limit exposure to HPV
HPV is passed from one person to another during skin-to-skin contact with an infected area of the body. Although HPV can be spread during skin to skin contact − including vaginal, anal, and oral sex − sex doesn't have to occur for the infection to spread. All that is needed is skin-to-skin contact with an area of the body infected with HPV. This means that the virus can be spread without sex. It is even possible for a genital infection to spread through hand-to-genital contact.
Also, HPV infection seems to be able to spread from one part of the body to another. This means that an infection may start in the cervix and then spread to the vagina and vulva.
It can be very hard not to be exposed to HPV. It may be possible to prevent HPV infection by not allowing others to have contact with your anal or genital area, but even then there might be other ways to become infected that aren’t yet clear. 
Limiting the number of sex partners and avoiding sex with people who have had many other sex partners may lower your risk of exposure to HPV.  But again, HPV is very common, so having sexual activity with even one other person can put you at risk. Remember that someone can have HPV for years and still have no symptoms. So it's possible someone can have the virus and pass it on without knowing it.
Use a condom
Condoms (“rubbers”) provide some protection against HPV but they don’t completely prevent infection. One reason that condoms cannot protect completely is because they don’t cover every possible HPV-infected area of the body, such as skin of the genital or anal area. Still, condoms provide some protection against HPV, and they also help protect against HIV and some other sexually transmitted infections. 
Don't smoke
Not smoking is another important way to reduce the risk of cervical pre-cancer and cancer.The best way to find cervical cancer early is to have regular screening tests. The tests for cervical cancer screening are the HPV test and the Pap test. These tests can be done alone or at the same time (called a co-test). Regular screening has been shown to prevent cervical cancers and save lives. The most important thing to remember is to get screened regularly, no matter which test you get.
Early detection greatly improves the chances of successful treatment of pre-cancers and cancer. Being aware of any signs and symptoms of cervical cancer can also help avoid delays in diagnosis.
For more information about using the HPV test and the Pap test to find cervical cancer early, see The American Cancer Society Guidelines for the Prevention and Early Detection of Cervical Cancer.The American Cancer Society recommends that individuals with a cervix  follow these guidelines to help find cervical cancer early. Following these guidelines can also find pre-cancers, which can be treated to keep cervical cancer from starting. These guidelines do not apply to people who have been diagnosed with cervical cancer or cervical pre-cancer. These women should have follow-up testing and cervical cancer screening as recommended by their health care team.

Cervical cancer testing (screening) should begin at age 25.
Those aged 25 to 65 should have a primary HPV test* every 5 years. If primary HPV testing is not available, screening may be done with either a co-test that combines an HPV test with a Papanicolaou (Pap) test every 5 years or a Pap test alone every 3 years.  (*A primary HPV test is an HPV test that is done by itself for screening. The US Food and Drug Administration has approved certain tests to be primary HPV tests.) The most important thing to remember is to get screened regularly, no matter which test you get.


Those over age 65 who have had regular screening in the past 10 years with normal results and no history of CIN2 or more serious diagnosis within the past 25 years should stop cervical cancer screening. Once stopped, it should not be started again.


People who have had a total hysterectomy (removal of the uterus and cervix) should stop screening (such as Pap tests and HPV tests), unless the hysterectomy was done as a treatment for cervical cancer or serious pre-cancer. People who have had a hysterectomy without removal of the cervix (called a supra-cervical hysterectomy) should continue cervical cancer screening according to the guidelines above.


People who have been vaccinated against HPV should still follow these guidelines for their age groups.

Some people believe that they can stop cervical cancer screening once they have stopped having children. This is not true. They should continue to follow American Cancer Society guidelines.
Considerations for Other Patient Populations
If you have a history of a serious pre-cancer, you should continue to have testing for at least 25 years after that condition was found, even if the testing goes past age 65.
Those who are at high risk of cervical cancer because of a suppressed immune system (for example from HIV infection, organ transplant, or long-term steroid use) or because they were exposed to DES in utero may need to be screened more often. They should follow the recommendations of their health care team.
Importance of being screened for cervical cancer
Cervical cancer was once one of the most common causes of cancer death for American women. The cervical cancer death rate dropped significantly with the increased use of the Pap test for screening. But the death rate has not changed much over the last 10 years.
In recent years, the HPV test has been approved as another screening test for cervical cancer.  The HPV test looks for infection by high-risk types of HPV that are more likely to cause pre-cancers and cancers of the cervix. The HPV test can be used alone (primary HPV test) or at the same time as the Pap test (called a co-test).
Screening tests offer the best chance to have cervical cancer found early when treatment can be most successful. Screening can also actually prevent most cervical cancers by finding abnormal cervical cell changes (pre-cancers) so that they can be treated before they have a chance to turn into a cervical cancer.
Despite the benefits of cervical cancer screening, not all American women get screened. Most cervical cancers are found in women who have never had a Pap test or who have not had one recently. Women without health insurance and women who have recently immigrated are less likely to have cervical cancer screening.Financial issues can play an important role in whether or not women are screened for cervical cancer. Women with lower incomes and those without health insurance are less likely to be screened.
Many states ensure that private insurance companies, Medicaid, and public employee health plans pay for regular screening tests.
Other programs are also available to help provide financial assistance for women with lower incomes and those without insurance.
It's important to know that insurance coverage may or may not conform to American Cancer Society cancer screening guidelines.
Federal law
Coverage of cervical cancer screening tests is mandated by the Affordable Care Act (ACA), but that doesn’t apply to health plans that were in place before it was passed. You can find out the date your insurance plan started by contacting your health insurance plan administrator. If your plan started on or after September 23, 2010, it’s required to cover the recommended cervical cancer screening tests. If your plan started before September 23, 2010, it may still have coverage requirements mandated by your state, but each state is different.
Self-insured plans
Self-insured (or self-funded) plans pay employee health care costs from their own funds, even though they usually contract with another company to track and pay claims. You can find out if your health plan is self-insured by contacting your insurance administrator at work or reading your Summary of Plan Benefits. 
These plans are governed by the Affordable Care Act (ACA), so most are required to cover cervical cancer screening.

Women who have self-insured based health insurance should check with their health plans to see what cervical cancer screening services are offered.
Medicaid
By statute or agency policy, Medicaid or public assistance programs in all 50 states and the District of Columbia cover screening for cervical cancer either routinely or on a doctor’s recommendation. Please check with your state Medicaid office to learn more about what services are provided for cervical cancer screening.
Medicare
Medicare Part B covers tests used for cervical cancer screening, including a Pap test and pelvic exam every 2 years. For people at high risk for cervical or vaginal cancer, or if a woman is of childbearing age and has had an abnormal Pap test in the previous 3 years, Medicare covers screening every year.
Part B also covers human papillomavirus (HPV) tests once every 5 years for people ages 30 to 65.
This screening is provided without co-pay, co-insurance, or deductible as long as you go to a doctor that accepts Medicare.
National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early Detection Program


All states are making cervical cancer screening more available to women through the National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early Detection Program (NBCCEDP). This program provides breast and cervical cancer screening to women without health insurance for free or at very little cost. The NBCCEDP attempts to reach as many women in underserved communities as possible, including older women, women without health insurance and women who are members of racial and ethnic minorities.
Though the program is administered within each state, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) provides support to each state program.
Each state’s Department of Health will have information on how to contact the nearest program participant. For more information on this program, you can also contact the CDC at 1-800-CDC-INFO (1-800-232-4636) or on the web at www.cdc.gov/cancer/nbccedp.
If cervical cancer is detected during screening in this program, most states can now extend Medicaid benefits to these women to cover the costs of treatment.
To learn more about this program, see National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early Detection Program.
HPV vaccine costs
Insurance plans cover the cost of the HPV vaccine in accordance with the federal Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) recommendations. The HPV vaccine is also included in the federal Vaccine for Children (VFC) entitlement program, which covers vaccine costs for children and teens who don’t have insurance or who are underinsured.The best way to find cervical cancer early is to have regular screening tests. Regular screening has been shown to prevent cervical cancers and save lives. Early detection greatly improves the chances of successful treatment and can prevent any early cervical cell changes from becoming cancer. Being alert to any signs and symptoms of cervical cancer can also help avoid unnecessary delays in diagnosis.
The tests for cervical cancer screening are the HPV test and the Pap test. These tests can be done alone or at the same time (called a co-test) and are done during a pelvic exam.﻿Women with early cervical cancers and pre-cancers usually have no symptoms. Symptoms often do not begin until the cancer becomes larger and grows into nearby tissue. When this happens, the most common symptoms are:

Abnormal vaginal bleeding, such as bleeding after vaginal sex, bleeding after menopause, bleeding and spotting between periods, or having (menstrual) periods that are longer or heavier than usual. Bleeding after douching may also occur.
An unusual discharge from the vagina − the discharge may contain some blood and may occur between your periods or after menopause.
Pain during sex
Pain in the pelvic region

Signs and symptoms seen with more advanced disease can include:

Swelling of the legs
Problems urinating or having a bowel movement
Blood in the urine

These signs and symptoms can also be caused by conditions other than cervical cancer. Still, if you have any of these symptoms, see a health care professional right away. Ignoring symptoms may allow the cancer to grow to a more advanced stage and lower your chance for successful treatment.
For the best chances for treatment to be successful, don't wait for symptoms to appear. Have regular screening tests for cervical cancer.Finding cervical cancer often starts with an abnormal HPV (human papillomavirus) or Pap test result. This will lead to further tests which can diagnose cervical cancer or pre-cancer. The Pap test and HPV test are screening tests, not diagnostic tests. They cannot tell for certain if you have cervical cancer. An abnormal Pap test or HPV test result may mean more testing is needed to see if a cancer or a pre-cancer is present.
Cervical cancer may also be suspected if you have symptoms like abnormal vaginal bleeding or pain during sex. Your primary doctor or gynecologist often can do the tests needed to diagnose pre-cancers and cancers and may also be able to treat a pre-cancer.
If there is a diagnosis of invasive cancer, your doctor should refer you to a gynecologic oncologist, a doctor who specializes in cancers of women's reproductive systems.
Understanding abnormal cervical screening test results
Your current screening test results along with your past test results, determine your risk of developing cervical cancer. Your doctor will use them to figure out your next test or treatment. It could be a follow-up screening test in a year, a colposcopy, or one of the other procedures discussed below to treat any pre-cancers that might be found.  
Because there are many different follow-up or treatment options depending on your specific risk of developing cervical cancer, it is best to talk to your healthcare provider about your screening results in more detail, to fully understand your risk of cervical cancer and what follow-up plan is best for you.
Tests for people with symptoms of cervical cancer or abnormal cervical screening test results
Medical history and physical exam
First, the doctor will ask you about your personal and family medical history. This includes information related to risk factors and symptoms of cervical cancer. A complete physical exam will help evaluate your general state of health. You will have a pelvic exam and maybe a Pap test if one has not already been done. In addition, your lymph nodes will be felt to see if the cancer has spread (metastasis). 
Colposcopy
If you have certain symptoms that could mean cancer, if your Pap test result shows abnormal cells, or if your HPV test is positive, you will most likely need to have a procedure called a colposcopy. You will lie on the exam table as you do with a pelvic exam. The doctor will put a speculum in the vagina to help keep it open while examining the cervix with a colposcope. The colposcope is an instrument that stays outside the body and has magnifying lenses. It lets the doctor clearly see the surface of the cervix up close. Colposcopy itself is usually no more uncomfortable than any other speculum exam. It can be done safely even if you are pregnant. Like the Pap test, it is better not to do it during your menstrual period.
The doctor will put a weak solution of acetic acid (similar to vinegar) on your cervix to make any abnormal areas easier to see. If an abnormal area is seen, a small piece of tissue will be removed (biopsy) and sent to a lab to be looked at carefully. A biopsy is the best way to tell for certain if an abnormal area is a pre-cancer, a true cancer, or neither.
Types of cervical biopsies
Several types of biopsies can be used to diagnose cervical pre-cancers and cancers. If the biopsy can completely remove all of the abnormal tissue, it might be the only treatment needed.
Colposcopic biopsy
For this type of biopsy, first the cervix is examined with a colposcope to find the abnormal areas. Using a biopsy forceps, a small (about 1/8-inch) section of the abnormal area on the surface of the cervix is removed. The biopsy procedure may cause mild cramping, brief pain, and some slight bleeding afterward.
Endocervical curettage (endocervical scraping)
If colposcopy does not show any abnormal areas or if the transformation zone (the area at risk for HPV infection and pre-cancer) cannot be seen with the colposcope, another method must be used to check that area for cancer.
A narrow instrument (either a curette or a brush) is inserted into the endocervical canal (the part of the cervix closest to the uterus). The curette or brush is used to scrape the inside of the canal to remove some of the tissue, which is then sent to the lab to be checked. After this procedure, patients may feel a cramping pain, and they may also have some light bleeding.
Cone biopsy
In this procedure, also known as conization, the doctor removes a cone-shaped piece of tissue from the cervix. The base of the cone is formed by the exocervix (outer part of the cervix), and the point or apex of the cone is from the endocervical canal. The tissue removed in the cone includes the transformation zone (the border between the exocervix and endocervix, where cervical pre-cancers and cancers are most likely to start). A cone biopsy can also be used as a treatment to completely remove many pre-cancers and some very early cancers.
The methods commonly used for cone biopsies are the loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP), also called the large loop excision of the transformation zone (LLETZ), and the cold knife cone biopsy.

Loop electrosurgical procedure (LEEP, LLETZ): In this method, the tissue is removed with a thin wire loop that is heated by electricity and acts as a small knife. For this procedure, a local anesthetic is used, and it can be done in your doctor's office.
Cold knife cone biopsy: This method is done in a hospital. A surgical scalpel or a laser is used to remove the tissue instead of a heated wire. You will receive anesthesia during the operation (either a general anesthesia, where you are asleep, or a spinal or epidural anesthesia, where an injection into the area around the spinal cord makes you numb below the waist).

Possible complications of cone biopsies include bleeding, infection and narrowing of the cervix. 
Having had any type of cone biopsy will not prevent most women from getting pregnant, but if a large amount of tissue has been removed, women may have a higher risk of giving birth prematurely.
For people with cervical cancer
If a biopsy shows that cancer is present, your doctor may order certain tests to see if and how far the cancer has spread. Many of the tests described below are not necessary for every patient. Decisions about using these tests are based on the results of the physical exam and biopsy.
Cystoscopy, proctoscopy, and examination under anesthesia
These are most often done in women who have large tumors. They are not necessary if the cancer is caught early.
In a cystoscopy, a slender tube with a lens and a light is placed into the bladder through the urethra. This lets the doctor check your bladder and urethra to see if cancer is growing into these areas. Biopsy samples can be removed during cystoscopy for testing in the lab. Cystoscopy can be done under a local anesthetic, but some patients may need general anesthesia. Your doctor will let you know what to expect before and after the procedure.
Proctoscopy is a visual inspection of the rectum through a lighted tube to look for spread of cervical cancer into your rectum.
Your doctor may also do a pelvic exam while you are under anesthesia to find out if the cancer has spread beyond the cervix.
Imaging studies
If your doctor finds that you have cervical cancer, certain imaging studies may be done to look inside the body. These tests can show if and where the cancer has spread, which will help you and your doctor decide on a treatment plan.
Chest x-ray
Your chest may be x-rayed to see if cancer has spread to your lungs.
Computed tomography (CT)
CT scans are usually done if the tumor is larger or if there is concern about cancer spread. For more information, see CT Scan for Cancer.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
MRI scans look at the soft tissue parts of the body sometimes better than other imaging tests, like a CT scan. Your doctor will decide which imaging test is best to use in your situation.
For more information, see MRI for Cancer. 
Positron emission tomography (PET scan)
For a PET scan, a slightly radioactive form of sugar (known as FDG) is injected into the blood and collects mainly in cancer cells.
PET/CT scan: Often a PET scan is combined with a CT scan using a special machine that can do both at the same time. This lets the doctor compare areas of higher radioactivity on the PET scan with a more detailed picture on the CT scan. This is the type of PET scan most often used in patients with cervical cancer.
This test can help see if the cancer has spread to lymph nodes. PET scans can also be useful if your doctor thinks the cancer has spread but doesn’t know where.
Intravenous urography
Intravenous urography (also known as intravenous pyelogram, or IVP) is an x-ray of the urinary system taken after a special dye is injected into a vein. This test can find abnormal areas in the urinary tract, caused by the spread of cervical cancer. The most common finding is that the cancer has blocked the ureters (tubes that connect the kidneys to the bladder). IVP is rarely used for patients with cervical cancer because CT and MRI are also good at finding abnormal areas in the urinary tract, as well as others not seen with an IVP.After someone is diagnosed with cervical cancer, doctors will try to figure out if it has spread, and if so, how far. This process is called staging. The stage of a cancer describes the extent of the cancer in the body. It helps determine how serious the cancer is and how best to treat it. The stage is one of the most important factors in deciding how to treat the cancer and determining how successful treatment might be.
To determine the cancer’s stage after a cervical cancer diagnosis, doctors try to answer these questions:

How far has the cancer grown into the cervix?
Has the cancer reached nearby structures?
Has the cancer spread to the nearby lymph nodes or to distant organs?

Information from exams and tests is used to determine the size of the tumor, how deeply the tumor has invaded tissues in and around the cervix, and its spread to distant places (metastasis). For more information see Cancer Staging.
The FIGO (International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics) staging system is used most often for cancers of the female reproductive organs, including cervical cancer. For cervical cancer, the clinical stage is used and is based on the results of the doctor's physical exam, biopsies, imaging tests, and a few other tests that are done in some cases, such as cystoscopy and proctoscopy. It is not based on what is found during surgery. If surgery is done, a pathologic stage can be determined from the findings at surgery, but it does not change your clinical stage. Your treatment plan is based on the clinical stage.
Cervical cancer stage ranges from stages I (1) through IV (4). 
As a rule, the lower the number, the less the cancer has spread. A higher number, such as stage IV, means a more advanced cancer. And within a stage, an earlier letter means a lower stage. Cancers with similar stages tend to have a similar outlook and are often treated in much the same way.
Cervical cancer staging can be complex. If you have any questions about your stage, please ask your doctor to explain it to you in a way you understand. (An explanation of the FIGO system is in the stage table below.) 
 



FIGO Stage
Stage description


I
 
The cancer cells have grown from the surface of the cervix into deeper tissues of the cervix. Cancer has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. Cancer has not spread to distant sites.


 
IA
There is a very small amount of cancer, and it can be seen only under a microscope. It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. It has not spread to distant sites.


 
IA1
The area of cancer can only be seen with a microscope and is less than 3 mm (about 1/8-inch) deep. It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. It has not spread to distant sites.


 
IA2
The area of cancer can only be seen with a microscope and is between 3 mm and 5 mm (about 1/5-inch) deep. It not has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. It has not spread to distant sites.


 
IB
This includes stage I cancer that has spread deeper than 5 mm (about 1/5 inch) but is still limited to the cervix. It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. It has not spread to distant sites.


 
IB1
The cancer is deeper than 5 mm (about 1/5-inch) but not more than 2 cm (about 4/5-inch) in size. It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. It has not spread to distant sites.


 
IB2
The cancer is at least 2 cm in size but not larger than 4 cm. It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. It has not spread to distant sites.


 
IB3
The cancer is at least 4 cm in size and limited to the cervix. It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. It has not spread to distant sites.


II
 
The cancer has grown beyond the cervix and uterus, but hasn't spread to the walls of the pelvis or the lower part of the vagina. It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. It has not spread to distant sites.


 
IIA
The cancer has grown beyond the cervix and uterus but has not spread into the tissues next to the cervix (called the parametria). It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. It has not spread to distant sites.


 
IIA1
The cancer is not larger than 4 cm (about 1 3/5 inches). It not has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. It has not spread to distant sites.


 
IIA2
The cancer is 4 cm or larger. It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. It has not spread to distant sites.


 
IIB
The cancer has grown beyond the cervix and uterus and has spread into the tissues next to the cervix (the parametria). It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. It has not spread to distant sites.


III
 
The cancer has spread to the lower part of the vagina or the walls of the pelvis. The cancer may be blocking the ureters (tubes that carry urine from the kidneys to the bladder). It might or might not have not spread to nearby lymph nodes. It has not spread to distant sites.


 
IIIA
The cancer has spread to the lower part of the vagina but not the walls of the pelvis. It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. It has not spread to distant sites.


 
IIIB
The cancer has grown into the walls of the pelvis and/or is blocking one or both ureters causing kidney problems (called hydronephrosis). It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes. It has not spread to distant sites.


 
IIIC
The cancer can be any size. Imaging tests or a biopsy show the cancer has spread to nearby pelvic lymph nodes (IIIC1) or para-aortic lymph nodes (IIIC2). It has not spread to distant sites.


IV
 
The cancer has grown into the bladder or rectum or to far away organs like the lungs or bones.


 
IVA
The cancer has spread to the bladder or rectum or it is growing out of the pelvis.


 
IVB
The cancer has spread to distant organs outside the pelvic area, such as distant lymph nodes, lungs or bones.Survival rates can give you an idea of what percentage of people with the same type and stage of cancer are still alive a certain amount of time (usually 5 years) after they were diagnosed. They can’t tell you how long you will live, but they may help give you a better understanding of how likely it is that your treatment will be successful.
Keep in mind that survival rates are estimates and are often based on previous outcomes of large numbers of people who had a specific cancer, but they can’t predict what will happen in any particular person’s case. These statistics can be confusing and may lead you to have more questions. Ask your doctor how these numbers might apply to you. 
What is a 5-year relative survival rate?
A relative survival rate compares women with the same type and stage of cervical cancer to women in the overall population. For example, if the 5-year relative survival rate for a specific stage of cervical cancer is 90%, it means that women who have that cancer are, on average, about 90% as likely as women who don’t have that cancer to live for at least 5 years after being diagnosed.
Where do these numbers come from?
The American Cancer Society relies on information from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database, maintained by the National Cancer Institute (NCI), to provide survival statistics for different types of cancer.
The SEER database tracks 5-year relative survival rates for cervical cancer in the United States, based on how far the cancer has spread. The SEER database, however, does not group cancers by FIGO stages (stage 1, stage 2, stage 3, etc.). Instead, it groups cancers into localized, regional, and distant stages:

Localized: There is no sign that the cancer has spread outside of the cervix or uterus.
Regional: The cancer has spread beyond the cervix and uterus to nearby lymph nodes.
Distant: The cancer has spread to nearby organs (like the bladder or rectum) or distant parts of the body such as the lungs or bones.

5-year relative survival rates for cervical cancer
Based on women diagnosed with cervical cancer between 2013 and 2019.



SEER* Stage
5-year Relative Survival Rate


Localized
91%


Regional
60%


Distant
19%


All SEER stages combined
67%



*SEER= Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results
Understanding the numbers

Women now being diagnosed with cervical cancer may have a better outlook than these numbers show. Treatments improve over time, and these numbers are based on women who were diagnosed and treated at least five years earlier.
These numbers apply only to the stage of the cancer when it is first diagnosed. They do not apply later on if the cancer grows, spreads, or comes back after treatment.
These numbers don’t take everything into account. Survival rates are grouped based on how far the cancer has spread, but your age, overall health, how well the cancer responds to treatment, and other factors will also affect your outlook.It is important for you to have frank, open discussions with your cancer care team. They want to answer all of your questions, to help you make informed treatment and life decisions. Here are some questions to consider.
When you're told you have cervical cancer

What type of cervical cancer do I have?
Has my cancer spread outside the cervix?
Can the stage of my cancer be determined and what does that mean?
Will I need other tests before we can decide on treatment?
Do I need to see any other doctors or health professionals?
If I’m concerned about the costs and insurance coverage for my diagnosis and treatment, who can help me?

When deciding on a treatment plan

What are my treatment choices?
What treatment do you recommend and why?
How much experience do you have treating this type of cancer?
Should I get a second opinion? How do I do that? Can you recommend someone?
What would the goal of the treatment be?
How quickly do we need to decide on treatment?
What should I do to be ready for treatment?
How long will treatment last? What will it be like? Where will it be done?
What risks or side effects are there to the treatments you suggest? Are there things I can do to reduce these side effects?
How might treatment affect my daily activities?
Will the treatment put me into menopause early?
Will I need hormone replacement therapy after treatment? If so, is it safe?
What are the chances my cancer will recur (come back) with these treatment plans?
What will we do if the treatment doesn’t work or if the cancer recurs?
Will I be able to have children after my treatment?
What are my treatment options if I want to have children in the future?

During treatment
Once treatment begins, you’ll need to know what to expect and what to look for. Not all of these questions may apply to you, but asking the ones that do may be helpful.

How will we know if the treatment is working?
Is there anything I can do to help manage side effects?
What symptoms or side effects should I tell you about right away?
How can I reach you on nights, holidays, or weekends?
Do I need to change what I eat during treatment?
Are there any limits on what I can do?
Can I have sex during treatment? Will my sex life change after treatment?
What kind of exercise should I do, and how often?
Can you suggest a mental health professional I can see if I start to feel overwhelmed, depressed, or distressed?

After treatment

Will I need a special diet after treatment?
Are there any limits on what I can do?
What other symptoms should I watch for?
What kind of exercise should I do now?
What type of follow-up will I need after treatment?
How often will I need to have follow-up exams and imaging tests?
Will I need any blood tests?
How will we know if the cancer has come back? What should I watch for?
What will my options be if the cancer comes back?

Along with these examples, be sure to write down some of your own. For instance, you might want more information about recovery times. Or you might ask if you qualify for a clinical trial.
Keep in mind that doctors aren’t the only ones who can give you information. Other health care professionals, such as nurses and social workers, can answer some of your questions. To find out more about speaking with your health care team, see The Doctor-Patient Relationship.Many women with cervical cancer will have some type of surgery. Surgery can be used to:

Help diagnose cervical cancer
Help determine how far the cancer has spread
Help treat the cancer (especially for early-stage cancers)

Surgery for cervical pre-cancers
Two types of procedures can be used to treat pre-cancers of the cervix:

Ablation destroys cervical tissue with cold temperatures or with a laser rather than removing it.
Excisional surgery (conization) cuts out and removes the pre-cancer.   

Cryosurgery
Cryosurgery is a type of ablation where a very cold metal probe is placed directly on the cervix. This kills the abnormal cells by freezing them. It is used to treat cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN). This can be done in a doctor’s office or clinic. After cryosurgery, you may have a watery brown discharge for a few weeks. 
Laser ablation
Laser ablation directs a focused laser beam through the vagina to vaporize (burn off) abnormal cells. This might be done in a doctor’s office under local anesthesia (numbing medicine) or in the operating room with general anesthesia since it can cause more discomfort than cryotherapy. It is also used to treat cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN).
Conization
Another way to treat cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) is with excisional surgery called conization. The doctor removes a cone-shaped piece of tissue from the cervix. The tissue removed in the cone includes the transformation zone where cervical pre-cancers and cancers are most likely to start. A cone biopsy is not only used to diagnose pre-cancers and cancers. It can also be used as a treatment since it can sometimes completely remove pre-cancers and some very early cancers.
The procedure can be done in different ways:

Using a surgical blade (cold knife cone biopsy)
Using a laser beam (laser conization)
Using a thin wire heated by electricity (the loop electrosurgical excision procedure, LEEP or LEETZ procedure).

Surgery for invasive cervical cancer
Procedures to treat invasive cervical cancer are:

Hysterectomy (simple or radical)
Trachelectomy

Simple hysterectomy
A simple hysterectomy removes the uterus (both the body of the uterus and the cervix) but not the structures next to the uterus (parametria and uterosacral ligaments). The vagina and pelvic lymph nodes are not removed. The ovaries are usually left in place unless there is another reason to remove them.
Simple hysterectomy can be used to treat certain types of severe CIN or certain types of very early cervical cancer.
There are different ways to do a hysterectomy:

Abdominal hysterectomy: The uterus is removed through a surgical incision in the front of the abdomen.
Vaginal hysterectomy: The uterus is removed through the vagina.
Laparoscopic hysterectomy: The uterus is removed using laparoscopy. First, a thin tube with a tiny video camera at the end (the laparoscope) is inserted into one or more very small surgical incisions made on the abdominal wall to see inside the abdomen and pelvis. Small instruments can be controlled through the tube(s), so the surgeon can cut around the uterus without making a large cut in the abdomen. The uterus is then removed through a cut in the vagina.
Robotic-assisted surgery: In this approach, the laparoscopy is done with special tools attached to robotic arms that are controlled by the doctor to help perform precise surgery.

General anesthesia is used for all of these operations.
For a laparoscopic or vaginal hysterectomy, the hospital stay is usually 1 to 2 days, followed by a 2- to 3-week recovery period. A hospital stay of 3 to 5 days is common for an abdominal hysterectomy, and complete recovery takes about 4 to 6 weeks.
Possible side effects: Any type of hysterectomy results in infertility (inability to have children). Complications are unusual but could include bleeding, infection, or damage to the urinary or intestinal systems such as the bladder or colon.
Hysterectomy does not change a woman's ability to feel sexual pleasure. A woman does not need a uterus or cervix to reach orgasm. The area around the clitoris and the lining of the vagina remain as sensitive as before a hysterectomy. More information about managing the sexual side effects of cervical cancer treatment can be found in Sex and the Woman with Cancer.
Radical hysterectomy
For this operation, the surgeon removes the uterus along with the tissues next to the uterus (the parametria and the uterosacral ligaments), the cervix, and the upper part (about 1 inch [2-3cm]) of the vagina next to the cervix. The ovaries are not removed unless there is some other medical reason to do so. More tissue is removed in a radical hysterectomy than in a simple one, so the hospital stay can be longer. Some lymph nodes will also be removed and checked for cancer at this time. 
This surgery is usually done through a large abdominal incision (also known as open surgery). Often, some pelvic lymph nodes are removed as well. (This procedure, known as lymph node dissection, is discussed later in this section.)
A radical hysterectomy can also be done using laparoscopy or robot-assistance. (See the Simple hysterectomy section for a description of laparoscopy.) These techniques are also referred to as minimally invasive surgery. Laparoscopic (or robotic) surgery can result in less pain, less blood loss during the operation, and a shorter hospital stay compared to open surgery. However, it is very important to note that recent studies have shown that women who have minimally invasive radical hysterectomies for cervical cancer have a higher chance of the cancer recurring and a higher risk of dying from the cancer than those who have surgery through an abdominal incision (open surgery). Having a radical hysterectomy through an abdominal cut is the preferred type of surgery in most cases. Laparoscopic surgery may still be an option for a small specific group of women with early stage cancer, but you should discuss your options carefully with your doctor.
A modified radical hysterectomy is similar to a radical hysterectomy but does not remove as much of the vagina and tissues next to the uterus (the parametria and the uterosacral ligaments) and lymph nodes are usually not removed.
Possible side effects: Because the uterus is removed, this surgery results in infertility. Because some of the nerves to the bladder are removed, some women have problems emptying their bladder after this operation and may need a catheter for a time. Complications are unusual but could include bleeding, infection, or damage to the urinary and intestinal systems such as the bladder or colon.
Removal of some of the lymph nodes to check for cancer may sometimes result in lymphedema (leg swelling). This is not common, but may happen after surgery and treated with different methods.
Radical hysterectomy does not change a woman's ability to feel sexual pleasure. Although the vagina is shortened, the area around the clitoris and the lining of the vagina is as sensitive as before. A woman does not need a uterus or cervix to reach orgasm. When cancer has caused pain or bleeding with intercourse, the hysterectomy may actually improve a woman's sex life by stopping these symptoms. More information about managing the sexual side effects of cervical cancer treatment can be found in Sex and the Woman with Cancer.
Trachelectomy
A radical trachelectomy, allows women to be treated without losing their ability to have children. The operation is done either through the vagina or the abdomen, and is sometimes done using laparoscopy.
This procedure removes the cervix and the upper part of the vagina but not the body of the uterus. The surgeon then places a permanent "purse-string" stitch inside the uterine cavity to keep the opening of the uterus closed, the way the cervix normally would.Radiation therapy uses high energy x-rays to kill cancer cells. Depending on the stage of the cervical cancer, radiation therapy may be used:

As a part of the main treatment. For some stages of cervical cancer, the preferred treatment is radiation alone or surgery followed by radiation. For other stages, radiation and chemo given together (called concurrent chemoradiation) is the preferred treatment as the chemo helps the radiation work better.
To treat cervical cancer that has spread or that has come back after treatment. Radiation therapy may be used to treat cervical cancers that have spread to other organs and tissues.

The types of radiation therapy most often used to treat cervical cancer are:

External beam radiation
Brachytherapy

It is important to know that smoking increases the side effects from radiation and can make treatment less effective. If you smoke, you should stop.
External beam radiation
External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) aims x-rays at the cancer from a machine outside the body. Treatment is much like getting a regular x-ray, but the radiation dose is stronger.
Each radiation treatment lasts only a few minutes, but getting you into place for treatment usually takes longer. The procedure itself is painless.
When EBRT is used as the main treatment for cervical cancer, it is usually combined with chemotherapy (called concurrent chemoradiation). Often, a low dose of the chemo drug called cisplatin is used. Other chemo drugs can be used as well. The radiation treatments are given 5 days a week for about 5 weeks. The chemotherapy is given at scheduled times during the radiation. The schedule is determined by which drug is used. If the cancer has not spread to distant areas, brachytherapy, which is discussed below, may also be given after the concurrent chemoradiation is complete. 
EBRT can also be used as the main treatment of cervical cancer in patients who can’t tolerate chemoradiation, can’t safely have surgery, or choose not to have surgery. It can also be used by itself to treat areas of cancer spread.
Possible side effects of EBRT
Short-term side effects of external beam radiation therapy for cervical cancer can include:

Fatigue (tiredness)
Upset stomach
Diarrhea or loose stools (if radiation is given to the pelvis or abdomen)
Nausea and vomiting
Skin changes (mild redness to peeling or flaking)


Radiation cystitis: Radiation to the pelvis can irritate the bladder (radiation cystitis), causing discomfort, an urge to urinate often, and sometimes blood in the urine.
Vaginal pain: Radiation can make the vulva and vagina more sensitive and sore, and sometimes causes a discharge.
Menstrual changes: Pelvic radiation can affect the ovaries, leading to menstrual changes and even early menopause
Low blood counts: Anemia (low levels of red blood cells) can make you  feel tired. Neutropenia (low levels of white blood cells) increases the risks of serious infection. Thrombocytopenia (low levels of platelet counts) increases the risk of bleeding. 

When chemotherapy is given with radiation, the blood counts tend to be lower and fatigue and nausea tend to be worse. These side effects typically improve in the weeks after treatment is stopped.
Other, long-term side effects are also possible with EBRT. These are described below.
Brachytherapy (internal radiation therapy)
Brachytherapy, or internal radiation therapy, puts a source of radiation in or near the cancer. This type of radiation only travels a short distance. The type of brachytherapy used most often to treat cervical cancer is known as intracavitary brachytherapy. The radiation source is placed in a device in the vagina (and sometimes in the cervix). Brachytherapy  is mainly used in addition to EBRT as a part of the main treatment for cervical cancer. Rarely, it might be used alone in very specific cases of early-stage cervical cancers.
There are two types of brachytherapy:

Low-dose rate (LDR) brachytherapy is completed over a few days. During this time, the patient stays in bed in a private room in the hospital with instruments holding the radioactive material in place. While the radiation therapy is being given, the hospital staff will care for you, but will also take precautions to avoid being exposed to radiation themselves.
High-dose rate (HDR) brachytherapy is done as an outpatient over several treatments (often at least a week apart). For each high-dose treatment, the radioactive material is inserted for a few minutes and then removed. The advantage of HDR treatment is that you do not have to stay in the hospital or stay still for long periods of time.

To treat cervical cancer in women who have had a hysterectomy, the radioactive material is placed in a tube in the vagina.
To treat a woman who still has a uterus, the radioactive material can be placed in a small metal tube (called a tandem) that goes in the uterus, along with small round metal holders (ovoids) placed near the cervix. This is sometimes called tandem and ovoid treatment.
Another option is called tandem and ring. For this, a round holder (like a disc) is placed close to the uterus. The choice of which one to use depends on what type of brachytherapy is planned.
Possible short-term side effects of brachytherapy
Since the radiation only travels a short distance with brachytherapy, the main effects of the radiation are on the cervix and the walls of the vagina. The most common side effect is irritation of the vagina. It may become red and sore, and there may be a discharge. The vulva may become irritated as well.
Brachytherapy can also cause many of the same side effects as EBRT, such as fatigue, diarrhea, nausea, irritation of the bladder, and low blood counts. Often brachytherapy is given right after external beam radiation (before the side effects can go away), so it can be hard to know which type of treatment is causing the side effect.  
Long-term side effects of radiation therapy
Women can experience side effects related to radiation months to years after treatment.
Vaginal stenosis: Both EBRT and brachytherapy can cause scar tissue to form in the vagina. The scar tissue can make the vagina narrower (called vaginal stenosis), less able to stretch, or even shorter, which can make vaginal sex painful.
A woman can help prevent this problem by stretching the walls of her vagina several times a week, either by having sex or by using a vaginal dilator (a plastic or rubber tube used to stretch out the vagina). For more information, see Sex and the Women With Cancer.
Vaginal dryness: Vaginal dryness and painful sex can be long-term side effects from radiation (both brachytherapy and EBRT). Estrogens used locally may help with vaginal dryness and changes to the vaginal lining, especially if radiation to the pelvis damaged the ovaries, and caused early menopause. These hormones are typically applied in the vagina and absorbed into the genital area, rather than taken by mouth. They come in gel, cream, ring, and tablet forms. For more information, see Sex and the Women With Cancer.
Rectal bleeding/rectal stenosis: Radiation to the rectal wall can cause chronic inflammation of the area which can lead to bleeding and sometimes stenosis (narrowing) of the rectum which can be painful. An abnormal opening (called a fistula) also may form between the rectum and vagina, causing stool to come out of the vagina. These problems typically happen during the first 3 years after radiation treatment. Additional treatments, such as surgery, may be needed to fix these complications.
Urinary problems: Radiation to the pelvis can cause chronic radiation cystitis (as mentioned above), blood in the urine, or an abnormal opening between the bladder and vagina (called a fistula). These side effects can be seen many years after radiation therapy.
Weakened bones: Radiation to the pelvis can weaken the bones, leading to fractures. Hip fractures are the most common, and might occur 2 to 4 years after radiation. Bone density tests are recommended to monitor the risk of fracture.
Swelling of the leg(s): If pelvic lymph nodes are treated with radiation, it can lead to fluid drainage problems in the leg. This can cause the leg to swell severely , a condition called lymphedema.
If you are having side effects from radiation treatment, discuss them with your cancer care team.Chemotherapy (chemo) uses anti-cancer drugs that are injected into a vein or given by mouth. These drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach almost all areas of the body, making this treatment useful for killing cancer cells in most parts of the body.
Not all women with cervical cancer will need chemo, but there are a few situations in which chemo may be recommended:
As part of the main treatment for cervical cancer
For some stages of cervical cancer, the preferred treatment is radiation and chemo given together (called concurrent chemoradiation). The chemo helps the radiation work better. Options for concurrent chemoradiation include:

Cisplatin given weekly during radiation. This drug is given into a vein (IV) before the radiation appointment. (If cisplatin is not a good option, carboplatin may be used instead.)
Cisplatin plus 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) given every 3 weeks during radiation.

For cervical cancer that has spread or come back after treatment
Chemo may be used to treat cervical cancer that has spread to other organs and tissues (advanced cervical cancer). It can also be helpful when cervical cancer comes back after treatment with chemoradiation (recurrent cervical cancer).
The chemo drugs most often used to treat cervical cancer that has come back or spread to other areas include:

Cisplatin
Carboplatin
Paclitaxel (Taxol)
Topotecan

Combinations of these drugs are often used.
Some other drugs can be used as well, such as docetaxel (Taxotere), ifosfamide (Ifex), 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), irinotecan (Camptosar), gemcitabine (Gemzar)and mitomycin.
Bevacizumab (Avastin), a targeted drug, may be added to chemo.
How is chemotherapy given?
Chemo drugs for cervical cancer are typically given into a vein (IV), either as an injection over a few minutes or as an infusion in a vein over a longer period of time. This can be done in a doctor’s office, infusion center, or in a hospital setting.


Chemo is given in cycles, followed by a rest period to give you time to recover from the effects of the drugs. Cycles are most often weekly or 3 weeks long. The schedule varies depending on the drugs used. For example, with some drugs, the chemo is given only on the first day of the cycle. With others, it is given for a few days in a row, or once a week. Then, at the end of the cycle, the chemo schedule repeats to start the next cycle.
Sometimes, a slightly larger and sturdier IV is required to give chemo. These are known as central venous catheters (CVCs), central venous access devices (CVADs), or central lines. They are used to put medicines, blood products, nutrients, or fluids right into your blood. They can also be used to take blood for testing.
There are many different kinds of central venous catheters (CVCs). The most common types are the port and the PICC line.
Side effects of chemotherapy for cervical cancer
Chemo drugs kill cancer cells but also damage some normal cells, which can lead to certain side effects. Side effects depend on the type and dose of the drugs and the length of time you are treated. Many side effects are short-term and go away after treatment is finished, but some can last a long time or even be permanent. It's important to tell your health care team if you have any side effects, as there are often ways to lessen them.
Common short term side effects of chemotherapy can include:

Nausea and vomiting
Loss of appetite
Hair loss
Mouth sores
Fatigue (tiredness)

Because chemotherapy can damage the blood-producing cells of the bone marrow, the blood cell counts might become low. This can result in:

An increased chance of infection from a shortage of white blood cells (called neutropenia)
Bleeding or bruising after minor cuts or injuries because of a shortage of blood platelets (called thrombocytopenia)
Shortness of breath or fatigue due to low red blood cell counts (called anemia)

When chemo is given with radiation, the side effects are often more severe. The nausea, fatigue, diarrhea, and problems with low blood counts are often worse.
Your health care team will watch for side effects and can give you medicines to help prevent them or treat them to help you feel better. For example, you can be given drugs to help prevent or reduce nausea and vomiting.
Long-term side effects of chemotherapy can include:
Menstrual changes: For younger women who have not had their uterus removed as a part of treatment, changes in menstrual periods are a common side effect of chemo. But even if your periods stop while you are on chemo, you might still be able to get pregnant. Getting pregnant while receiving chemo is not safe, as it could lead to birth defects and interfere with treatment. This is why it’s important that women who are pre-menopausal before treatment and are sexually active discuss with their doctor the options for birth control. Patients who have finished treatment (like chemo) can often go on to have children, but it's important to talk to your doctor about when it is safe to do so.
Premature menopause (not having any more menstrual periods) and infertility (not being able to become pregnant) may occur and may be permanent. Some chemo drugs are more likely to cause this than others. The older a woman is when she gets chemo, the more likely it is that she will become infertile or go through menopause as a result. If this happens, there is an increased risk of bone loss and osteoporosis. Medicines that can treat or help prevent problems with bone loss are available. 
Neuropathy: Some drugs used to treat cervical cancer, including paclitaxel and cisplatin, can damage nerves outside of the brain and spinal cord. The injury can sometimes lead to symptoms like numbness, pain, burning or tingling sensations, sensitivity to cold or heat, or weakness, mainly in the hands and feet. This called peripheral neuropathy. In most cases this gets better or even goes away once treatment stops, but it might last a long time in some women.
Nephrotoxicity: Cisplatin, the main chemo drug used to treat cervical cancer, can damage the kidneys (also called nephrotoxicity). Many times the damage is preventable and reversible, but sometimes the damage may be long-lasting. Often, there are no symptoms, but the damage can be seen on bloodwork done routinely while chemo is given. If kidney damage happens, the cisplatin is usually stopped and carboplatin may be used instead. 
Other side effects are also possible. Some of these are more common with certain chemo drugs. Ask your cancer care team to tell you about the possible side effects of the specific drugs you are getting.Targeted drug therapy is the use of medicines that target or are directed at proteins on cervical cancer cells that help them grow, spread, or live longer. Targeted drugs work to destroy cancer cells or slow down their growth.  They have different side effects than chemotherapy and some are taken as a pill.
Some targeted therapy drugs, for example, monoclonal antibodies, work in more than one way to control cancer cells and may also be considered immunotherapy because they boost the immune system.
Different types of targeted drug therapy can be used to treat cervical cancer.
Drugs that target blood vessel formation
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a protein that helps tumors form new blood vessels (a process known as angiogenesis) to get nutrients they need to grow. Some targeted drugs called angiogenesis inhibitors stop VEGF from working and block this new blood vessel growth.
Bevacizumab (Avastin®) is an angiogenesis inhibitor that can be used to treat advanced cervical cancer. It is a monoclonal antibody (a man-made version of a specific immune system protein) that targets VEGF.
This drug is often used with chemo for a time. Then, if the cancer responds, the chemo may be stopped and the bevacizumab given by itself until the cancer starts growing again.
Possible side effects of drugs that target VEGF
The possible side effects of this drug are different from those of chemotherapy drugs. Some of the more common side effects can include:

High blood pressure
Feeling tired
Nausea

Less common but more serious side effects can include:

Problems with bleeding
Blood clots
Wound healing
Heart failure or a heart attack

Other rare but serious side effects are the formation of an abnormal opening (called a fistula) between the vagina and part of the colon or intestine or the formation of a hole in the bowel.
Antibody-drug conjugates
An antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) is a monoclonal antibody linked to a chemotherapy drug.
Tisotumab vedotin-tftv (Tivdak): This ADC has an antibody that targets tissue-factor (TF) protein on cancer cells. It acts like a homing signal by attaching to the TF protein bringing the chemo directly to the cancer cell. It can be used to treat cervical cancer that has spread (metastasized) to another part of the body or come back after initial treatment (recurred), typically after at least 2 other drug treatments have been tried. This drug is given in a vein (IV).
Possible side effects of tisotumab vedotin-tftv
Common side effects can include feeling tired, nausea, hair loss, vomiting, bleeding, diarrhea, rash, and nerve damage (peripheral neuropathy).
Common lab abnormalities that might be seen with this drug include low red blood cell counts (anemia), low white blood cell counts, and abnormal kidney function.
This drug can have major side effects involving the eyes. People taking this drug can have dry eye, changes in vision, vision loss, or ulceration of the cornea. They should have regular eye exams while on this drug and tell their healthcare team right away if they have any eye symptoms.Immunotherapy is the use of medicines to boost a person’s own immune system to recognize and destroy cancer cells more effectively. Immunotherapy typically works on specific proteins involved in the immune system to enhance the immune response. They have different and sometimes less severe side effects than chemotherapy. ﻿
Some immunotherapy drugs, for example, monoclonal antibodies, work in more than one way to control cancer cells and may also be considered targeted therapy because they block a specific protein on the cancer cell to keep it from growing.
Immunotherapy can sometimes be used to treat cervical cancer.
Immune checkpoint inhibitors
An important part of the immune system is its ability to keep itself from attacking the body's normal cells. To do this, it uses “checkpoints” – proteins on immune cells that need to be turned on (or off) to start an immune response. Cancer cells sometimes use these checkpoints to avoid being attacked by the immune system. Newer drugs that target these checkpoints are being used as cancer treatments.
Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) targets PD-1, a protein on immune system cells called T cells that normally helps keep these cells from attacking other cells in the body. By blocking PD-1, these drugs boost the immune response against cancer cells. This can shrink some tumors or slow their growth.
Before pembrolizumab can be used, a lab test might need to be done on the cancer cells to show they have at least a certain amount of the PD-L1 protein.
If enough PD-L1 protein is detected, pembrolizumab can be used:

By itself for cervical cancer that has come back or that has spread while getting chemotherapy or after chemotherapy.
Along with chemotherapy, with or without bevacizumab, for cervical cancer that is not shrinking with current treatment, has come back, or has spread to distant sites.

Regardless of whether there are PD-L1 proteins detected on the cancer cells, pembrolizumab can be used:

 Along with concurrent chemoradiation for advanced stage cervical cancer.

This immunotherapy drug is given as an intravenous (IV) infusion every 3 or 6 weeks.
Possible side effects of immunotherapy
Side effects of immunotherapy drugs can include fatigue, fever, nausea, headache, skin rash, loss of appetite, constipation, joint/muscle pain, and diarrhea.
Other, more serious side effects occur less often. These drugs work by basically removing the brakes on the body’s immune system. Sometimes the immune system starts attacking other parts of the body, which can cause serious or even life-threatening problems in the lungs, intestines, liver, hormone-making glands, kidneys, or other organs.
It’s very important to report any new side effects to your health care team right away. If you do have a serious side effect, treatment may need to be stopped and you may be given high doses of corticosteroids to suppress your immune system.The stage of a cervical cancer is the most important factor in choosing treatment. But other factors can also affect your treatment options, including the exact location of the cancer within the cervix, the type of cancer (squamous cell or adenocarcinoma), your age and overall health, and whether you want to have children.



Stage IA1
Treatment for this stage depends on whether or not you want to be able to have children (maintain fertility) and whether or not the cancer has grown into blood or lymph vessels (called lymphovascular invasion).
Treatment options for women who want to maintain fertility
A cone biopsy is the preferred procedure for women who want to have children after the cancer is treated.

If the edges of the cone don’t contain cancer cells (called negative margins), the woman can be watched closely without further treatment as long as the cancer doesn’t come back.
If the edges of the cone biopsy have cancer cells (called positive margins), then cancer may have been left behind. This can be treated with a repeat cone biopsy or a radical trachelectomy.
If the cancer has grown into blood or lymph vessels, one treatment option is a cone biopsy (with negative margins) with removal of pelvic lymph nodes. Another option is a radical trachelectomy along with removal of the pelvic lymph nodes.

Treatment options for women who don’t want to maintain fertility

A simple hysterectomy may be an option if the cancer shows no lymphovascular invasion and the edges of the biopsy have no cancer cells. If the edges of the biopsy have cancer cells present, a repeat cone biopsy or a radical hysterectomy with removal of the pelvic lymph nodes might be an option.
If the cancer has grown into blood or lymph vessels, you might need a radical hysterectomy along with removal of the pelvic lymph nodes. Sometimes, surgery is not done and external beam radiation to the pelvis followed by brachytherapy is used.

If none of the lymph nodes are found to have cancer, radiation may still be discussed as an option if the tumor is large, if the tumor has grown into blood or lymph vessels, or if the tumor is invading the surrounding connective tissue that supports organs such as the uterus, bladder, vagina (the stroma).
If the cancer has spread to the tissues next to the uterus (called the parametria) or to any lymph nodes, or if the tissue removed has positive margins, radiation (EBRT) with chemotherapy is usually recommended. The doctor may also advise brachytherapy after the combined chemo and radiation are done.
Stage IA2
Treatment for this stage depends in part on whether or not you want to continue to be able to have children (maintain fertility).
Treatment options for women who want to maintain fertility

Cone biopsy with removal of pelvic lymph nodes (pelvic lymph node dissection)
Radical trachelectomy with pelvic lymph node dissection

Treatment options for women who don’t want to maintain fertility

External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) to the pelvis plus brachytherapy
Radical hysterectomy with removal of pelvic lymph nodes

 If none of the lymph nodes have cancer cells, radiation may still be an option if the tumor is large, if the tumor has grown into blood or lymph vessels, or if the tumor is invading the surrounding connective tissue that supports organs such as the uterus, bladder, vagina (the stroma).
If the cancer has spread to the tissues next to the uterus (called the parametria) or to any lymph nodes, or if the tissue removed has positive margins, radiation (EBRT) with chemotherapy is usually recommended. The doctor may also advise brachytherapy after the combined chemo and radiation are done.
Stages IB and IIA


Stages IB1 and IB2
Treatment options for women who want to maintain fertility

Radical trachelectomy with pelvic lymph node dissection and sometimes removal of the para-aortic lymph nodes

Treatment options for women who don’t want to maintain fertility

Radical hysterectomy with removal of lymph nodes in the pelvis and sometimes lymph nodes from the para-aortic area. If none of the lymph nodes are found to have cancer, radiation may still be discussed as an option if the tumor is large, if the tumor has grown into blood or lymph vessels, or if the tumor is invading the surrounding connective tissue that supports organs such as the uterus, bladder, vagina (the stroma). If the cancer has spread to the tissues next to the uterus (called the parametria) or to any lymph nodes, or if the tissue removed has positive margins, radiation (EBRT) with chemotherapy is usually recommended. The doctor may also advise brachytherapy after the combined chemo and radiation are done.
Radiation using both brachytherapy and external beam radiation therapy may be an option if a woman is not healthy enough for surgery or if she decides she does not want surgery. Chemotherapy (chemo) may be given with the radiation (concurrent chemoradiation).

Stage IIA1
Treatment options

Radical hysterectomy with pelvic lymph node dissection and para-aortic lymph node sampling: If cancer cells are found in the removed lymph nodes, or in the edges of the tissue removed (positive margins), surgery may be followed by radiation therapy, which is often given with chemo (concurrent chemoradiation).
Radiation with or without chemotherapy: The radiation therapy includes both external beam radiation and brachytherapy. The chemo may be cisplatin, carboplatin, or cisplatin plus fluorouracil. 


Stages IB3 and IIA2
Treatment options

Chemoradiation: The chemo may be cisplatin, carboplatin, or cisplatin plus fluorouracil. The radiation therapy includes both external beam radiation and brachytherapy.
Radical hysterectomy with pelvic lymph node dissection and para-aortic lymph node sampling: If cancer cells are found in the removed lymph nodes, or in the edges of the tissue removed (positive margins), surgery may be followed by radiation therapy, which is often given with chemo (concurrent chemoradiation).
Chemoradiation followed by a hysterectomy


Stages IIB, III, IVA
Treatment options
Chemoradiation: The chemo may be cisplatin, carboplatin, or cisplatin plus fluorouracil. The radiation therapy includes both external beam radiation and brachytherapy. For treatment of Stage III or Stage IV cervical cancer, an option may also be pembrolizumab given with chemoradiation.
Stage IVB
At this stage, the cancer has spread out of the pelvis to other areas of the body. Stage IVB cervical cancer is not usually considered curable. Treatment options include radiation therapy with or without chemo to try to slow the growth of the cancer or help relieve symptoms. Most standard chemo regimens include a platinum drug (cisplatin or carboplatin) along with another drug such as paclitaxel (Taxol), gemcitabine (Gemzar), or topotecan. The targeted drug bevacizumab (Avastin) with chemo, immunotherapy alone with pembrolizumab (Keytruda), the targeted drug tisotumab vedotin-tftv (Tivdak), or pembrolizumab (Keytruda) with chemo (with or without bevacizumab [Avastin]), may also be options.
Clinical trials are testing other combinations of chemo drugs, as well as some other experimental treatments.
Recurrent cervical cancer

Cancer that comes back after treatment is called recurrent cancer. Cancer can come back locally (in or near where it first started, such as the cervix, uterus or nearby the pelvic organs), or it can come back in distant areas (such as the lungs or bone).
If the cancer has recurred in the center of the pelvis only, extensive surgery (such as pelvic exenteration) may be an option for some patients, and offers the best chance for possibly curing the cancer (although it can have major side effects). Radiation therapy (sometimes along with chemo) might be another option. If not, chemo, immunotherapy, or targeted therapy may be used to slow the growth of the cancer or help relieve symptoms, but they aren’t expected to cure the cancer.
No matter which type of treatment your doctor recommends, it's important that you understand the goal of treatment (to try to cure the cancer, control its growth, or relieve symptoms), as well as its possible side effects and limitations. For example, sometimes chemo can improve your quality of life, and other times it might diminish it. You need to discuss this with your doctor.

New treatments that may benefit patients who have distant recurrence of cervical cancer are being evaluated in clinical trials.
Cervical cancer in pregnancy

A small number of cervical cancers are found in pregnant women. Most of these (70%) are stage I cancers. The treatment plan during pregnancy is determined by:

Tumor size
If nearby lymph nodes have cancer
How far along the pregnancy is
The specific type of cervical cancer

If the cancer is at a very early stage, such as stage IA, most doctors believe it is safe to continue the pregnancy to term and have treatment several weeks after birth. Surgery options after birth for early-stage cancers include a hysterectomy, radical trachelectomy, or a cone biopsy.
If the cancer is stage IB or higher, then you and your doctor must decide whether to continue the pregnancy. If not, treatment would be radical hysterectomy and/or radiation. Sometimes chemotherapy can be given during the pregnancy (in the second or third trimester) to shrink the tumor.
If you decide to continue the pregnancy, the baby should be delivered by cesarean section (C-section) as soon as it is able to survive outside the womb. More advanced cancers typically need be treated immediately.For some women with cervical cancer, treatment may remove or destroy the cancer. Completing treatment can be both stressful and exciting. You’ll be relieved to finish treatment, yet it’s hard not to worry about the cancer coming back. This is very common if you’ve had cancer.
For other women, the cancer may never go away completely. These women may get regular treatments with chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or other therapies to try to control the cancer for as long as possible. Learning to live with cancer that does not go away can be difficult and very stressful.
Follow-up care
If you have completed treatment, your doctors will still want to watch you closely. It’s very important to go to all of your follow-up appointments. Your doctor visits are a good time to ask questions and talk about any changes or problems you notice or concerns you have. During these visits, your doctors will ask if you are having any problems and may order exams and lab tests or imaging tests to look for signs of cancer or treatment side effects.
Almost any cancer treatment can have side effects. Some might only last for a few days or weeks, but others might last a long time. Some side effects might not even show up until years after you have finished treatment.
It's important to let your doctor know about any new symptoms or problems, because they could be caused by the cancer coming back or by a new disease or a second cancer.
Doctor visits
In women with no signs of cervical cancer remaining, many doctors recommend follow-up visits (which may include imaging tests and blood tests) with a physical exam every 3 to 6 months for the first couple of years after treatment, then every 6 months or so for the next few years. People who were treated for early-stage cancers may need exams less often. Some doctors may advise different follow-up schedules.
Most doctors recommend that women treated for cervical cancer keep getting regular Pap tests no matter how they were treated (surgery or radiation). Although cells for a Pap test are normally taken from the cervix, if you no longer have a cervix (because you had a trachelectomy or hysterectomy), the cells will be taken from the upper part of the vagina.
Survivors of cervical cancer should also follow the American Cancer Society Guidelines for the Early Detection of Cancer, such as those for breast, lung, and colorectal cancer.
Imaging tests
Imaging tests may be done if you have worrisome signs or symptoms of the cancer coming back.
Ask your doctor for a survivorship care plan
Talk with your doctor about developing a survivorship care plan for you. This plan might include:

A suggested schedule for follow-up exams and tests
A schedule for other tests you might need to look for long-term health effects from your cancer or its treatment
A list of possible late- or long-term side effects from your treatment, including what to watch for and when you should contact your doctor
Suggestions for things you can do that might improve your health, including possibly lowering your chances of the cancer coming back

Keeping health insurance and copies of your medical records
Even after treatment, it’s very important to keep health insurance. Tests and doctor visits cost a lot, and even though no one wants to think of their cancer coming back, this could happen.
At some point after your cancer treatment, you might find yourself seeing a new doctor who doesn’t know about your medical history. It’s important to keep copies of your medical records to give your new doctor the details of your diagnosis and treatment.
Can I lower the risk of my cancer progressing or coming back?
If you have (or have had) cervical cancer, you probably want to know if there are things you can do that might lower your risk of the cancer growing or coming back, such as exercising, eating a certain type of diet, or taking nutritional supplements. While there are some things you can do that might be helpful, more research is needed to know for sure.
Get regular physical activity
Some studies have shown that women who are more physically active after being diagnosed with cervical cancer might live longer. More research is being done in this area.  
Quit smoking
It is known that smoking is linked to an increased risk of cervical cancer. While it’s not clear if smoking can affect cervical cancer growth or recurrence, it is still helpful to stop smoking to decrease your risk of getting another smoking-related cancer. Not smoking can also help you tolerate chemotherapy and radiation better and decrease further damage to the cells of the cervix or cervical area. If you need help quitting, talk to your doctor or call the American Cancer Society at 1-800-227-2345.
Adopt other healthy behaviors﻿
Adopting other healthy behaviors such as eating well and staying at a healthy weight might help, but no one knows for sure. However, we do know that these types of changes can have positive effects on your health that can extend beyond your risk of cervical cancer or other cancers.
About dietary supplements
So far, no dietary supplements (including vitamins, minerals, and herbal products) have been shown to clearly help lower the risk of cervical cancer progressing or coming back. This doesn’t mean that no supplements will help, but it’s important to know that none have been proven to do so.
Dietary supplements are not regulated like medicines in the United States – they do not have to be proven effective (or even safe) before being sold, although there are limits on what they’re allowed to claim they can do. If you’re thinking about taking any type of nutritional supplement, talk to your health care team. They can help you decide which ones you can use safely while avoiding those that might be harmful.
If the cancer comes back
If cancer does return at some point, your treatment options will depend on where the cancer is, what treatments you’ve had before, and your health. Surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, targeted therapy, immunotherapy, or some combination of these might be options. Other types of treatment might also be used to help relieve any symptoms from the cancer.
For more on how recurrent cancer is treated, see Treatment Options for Cervical Cancer, by Stage. For more general information on dealing with a recurrence, you may also want to read Coping With Cancer Recurrence.
Getting emotional support
It is normal to feel depressed, anxious, or worried when cervical cancer is a part of your life. Some people are affected more than others. But everyone can benefit from help and support from other people, whether friends and family, religious groups, support groups, professional counselors, or others. Learn more in Life After Cancer.
Second cancers after treatment
Cancer survivors can be affected by a number of health problems, but often a major concern is facing cancer again. Cancer that comes back after treatment is called a recurrence. But some cancer survivors may develop a new, unrelated cancer later. This is called a second cancer.
Unfortunately, being treated for cervical cancer doesn’t mean you can’t get another cancer. Women who have had cervical cancer can still get the same types of cancers that other women get. In fact, they might be at higher risk for certain types of cancer, including:

Cancers of the mouth and throat
Cancer of the larynx (voice box)
Anal cancer
Acute myeloid leukemia
Vulvar cancer
Vaginal cancer
Lung cancer
Cancers of the bladder and ureter
Stomach cancer
Colorectal cancer
Pancreas cancer

Many of these cancers are linked to smoking and/or infection with the human papilloma virus (HPV), which are also strongly linked to cervical cancer.
The increased risks of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and cancers of the rectum, bladder, and bone seem to be linked to treatment with radiation.
Can I lower my risk of getting a second cancer?
There are steps you can take to lower your risk and stay as healthy as possible. For example, women who have had cervical cancer should do their best to stay away from tobacco products. Smoking might further increase the risk of some of the second cancers that are more common after cervical cancer.
To help maintain good health, cervical cancer survivors should also:

Get to and stay at a healthy weight
Keep physically active and limit the time you spend sitting or lying down
Follow a healthy eating pattern that includes plenty of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains, and limits or avoids red and processed meats, sugary drinks, and highly processed foods
It's best not to drink alcohol. If you do drink, have no more than 1 drink per day

These steps may also lower the risk of some other health problems.If You Have Cervical Cancer
What is cervical cancer?
Cancer can start any place in the body. Cervical cancer starts in the cervix. It starts when cells in the cervix grow out of control and crowd out normal cells. This makes it hard for the body to work the way it should.
Cancer cells can spread to other parts of the body. Cancer cells in the cervix can sometimes travel to the lung and grow there. When cancer cells do this, it’s called metastasis. To doctors, the cancer cells in the new place look just like the ones from the cervix.
Cancer is always named for the place where it starts. So when cervical cancer spreads to the lung (or any other place), it’s still called cervical cancer. It’s not called lung cancer unless it starts from cells in the lung.