Cancer starts when cells in the body begin to grow out of control. Cells in nearly any part of the body can become cancer, and can then spread to other areas of the body. To learn more about cancer and how it starts and spreads, see What Is Cancer?
The types of cancers that develop in children are often different from the types that develop in adults. To learn more, see What Are the Differences Between Cancers in Adults and Children?
Lymphoma is a type of cancer that starts in cells called lymphocytes, which are part of the body’s immune system.
Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphoma
The main kinds of lymphomas are:

Hodgkin lymphoma (HL), also known as Hodgkin disease, which is named after Dr. Thomas Hodgkin, who first described it
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL)

These lymphomas differ in how they behave, spread, and respond to treatment, so knowing which type your child has is important.
Both of these types are more common in adults, but they can also develop in children and teens. Younger children are more likely to have NHL, while Hodgkin lymphoma is more likely to affect older children and teens.
Different types of NHL can develop in children and teens. Treatment depends on which type of NHL it is, so determining the exact type a child or teen has is important.
Hodgkin lymphoma is treated similarly in children and adults. For more information on this disease, see Hodgkin Lymphoma.
The lymph (lymphatic) system
The cells in which lymphoma starts (lymphocytes) can be found throughout the body’s lymph system, so knowing about the lymph system can be helpful in understanding lymphoma.
The lymph system is part of the body’s immune system, which helps fight infections and some other diseases. It also helps fluids move around in the body.
Lymphocytes
The lymph system is made up mainly of lymphocytes, a type of white blood cell. The main types of lymphocytes are:

B lymphocytes (B cells): B cells normally help protect the body against germs (bacteria or viruses) by making proteins called antibodies. The antibodies attach to the germs, marking them for destruction by other parts of the immune system.
T lymphocytes (T cells): There are several types of T cells, each with a special job. Some T cells destroy germs or abnormal cells in the body. Some T cells help boost or slow the activity of other immune system cells.

Lymphomas can develop from either B cells or T cells.
Parts of the lymph system
The lymph system is in many parts of the body, so lymphomas can start almost anywhere. (This can affect what symptoms a child has.)There are many types of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). These cancers are most often classified based on:

The type of lymphocyte they start in
How the lymphoma cells look under a microscope
Whether the lymphoma cells have certain chromosome, gene, or protein changes

Special lab tests are often needed to accurately classify lymphomas. These are described in Tests for Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma in Children.
The most common types of NHL in children and teens are largely different from those in adults. Nearly all childhood NHLs are one of these types:

Lymphoblastic lymphoma (LBL)
Burkitt lymphoma (small non-cleaved cell lymphoma)
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
Anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL)

All of these types of NHL are considered high-grade or aggressive lymphomas (meaning they tend to grow quickly) . Still, it's important to find out which type a child has because they can be treated differently.
There are many other types of NHL as well. These are much more common in adults and are rare in children, so they are not covered further here.
Lymphoblastic lymphoma
Lymphoblastic lymphoma (LBL) accounts for about 20% of NHL in children and teens in the United States. Boys are about twice as likely to get LBL as girls.
The cancer cells of LBL are very young lymphocytes called lymphoblasts. They are the same cells as those seen in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in children. In fact, if more than 25% of the bone marrow is made up of lymphoblasts, the disease is classified and treated as ALL instead of lymphoma.
Most cases of LBL develop from T cells and are called precursor T-lymphoblastic lymphomas. These lymphomas often start in the thymus, forming a mass in the area behind the breast bone and in front of the trachea (windpipe). This can cause problems breathing, which may be the first symptom of LBL.
Less often, LBL develops in the tonsils, lymph nodes of the neck, or other lymph nodes. It can spread very quickly to the bone marrow, other lymph nodes, the surface of the brain, and/or the membranes that surround the lungs and heart.
A smaller fraction of LBLs develop from B cells, and are called precursor B-lymphoblastic lymphomas. These lymphomas more often begin in lymph nodes outside the chest, particularly in the neck. They can also involve the skin and bones.
LBL can grow very quickly and can often cause trouble breathing, so it needs to be diagnosed and treated quickly.
Burkitt lymphoma
Burkitt lymphoma, also known as small non-cleaved cell lymphoma, accounts for about 40% of childhood NHL in the United States. It is most often seen in boys, usually between the ages of 5 and 14 years old.
Burkitt lymphoma is named after the doctor who first described it in African children. In certain parts of Africa, Burkitt lymphoma accounts for nearly all childhood NHL and over half of all childhood cancers. In African children this lymphoma usually develops in the jaw or other facial bones.
Burkitt lymphomas in other parts of the world, including the United States, most often start in the abdomen (belly). Typically, a child will develop a large tumor in the abdomen that can sometimes block the bowels (intestines). This can cause belly pain, nausea, and vomiting. Burkitt lymphoma can also sometimes start in the neck or tonsils, or rarely in other parts of the body.
This lymphoma develops from mature forms of B lymphocytes (B cells). It can spread quickly to other organs, including the surface of the brain or inside the brain. It is one of the fastest growing cancers known, so it needs to be diagnosed and treated quickly.
A similar type of lymphoma, sometimes called Burkitt-like lymphoma or non-Burkitt lymphoma, also shares some features with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (described below) when seen under the microscope.
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
This type of lymphoma accounts for about 15% to 20% of childhood NHL. It starts in mature forms of B cells, and it can grow almost anywhere in the body. DLBCL tends to occur more often in older children and teens than among younger children.
Compared to the lymphomas above, DLBCL isn’t as likely to grow as quickly, and it’s less likely to spread to the bone marrow or to the brain or spinal cord. Still, it needs to be treated aggressively, typically the same way that Burkitt lymphoma is treated.
A related but less common type of NHL, known as primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma (PMBCL), grows as a large mass in the mediastinum (the space between the lungs). It tends to be seen most often in older teens.
Anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL)
This type of lymphoma makes up about 10% of all NHL in children and teens. It usually develops from mature T cells. It may start in lymph nodes in the neck or other areas, and it may be found in the skin, lungs, bone, digestive tract, or other organs.
ALCL tends to develop more often in older children and teens than in younger children. It isn’t as likely to spread to the bone marrow or brain as some other childhood lymphomas, nor does it tend to grow as quickly.
In most children with ALCL, the lymphoma cells have changes in the ALK gene that help the cells grow. Newer targeted drugs called ALK inhibitors, which attack cells with ALK gene changes, have shown promise in treating childhood ALCL in recent years.About 12% of all childhood cancers are lymphomas.
About 800 children and teens are diagnosed with non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) in the United States each year.
NHL is about 2 to 3 times more common in boys than in girls, and it is more common in White children than Black children.
Overall, the risk of NHL in children increases with age. It can develop in children at any age, but it's uncommon in children younger than 5.
Statistics on survival can be found in Survival Rates for Childhood Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma.Research into the causes, diagnosis, and treatment of childhood non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is being done at many medical centers, university hospitals, and other institutions around the world.
Genetics
As noted in What Causes Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma in Children? scientists are making progress in understanding how changes in the DNA (genes) inside normal lymphocytes can cause them to develop into lymphoma cells.
Understanding the gene changes that often occur in lymphoma cells can help explain why these cells grow too quickly, live too long, and don't develop into normal, mature cells. More importantly, this information is being used to develop new treatments for lymphoma.
This progress has also led to very sensitive lab tests for detecting and monitoring this disease during treatment. Tests such as the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) can identify lymphoma cells based on some of these gene changes. This test is useful in determining how completely the lymphoma has been destroyed by treatment, and whether a relapse is likely if no further treatment is given.
Clinical trials of new treatments
Most children and teens with NHL are treated at major medical centers, where treatment is often given as part of a clinical trial to get the most up-to-date care. Several important questions are now being studied in clinical trials, such as:

Can some lymphomas be treated with less intense chemotherapy regimens, which might help children avoid some long-term side effects?
What is the best length of treatment for each type of NHL?
Can new chemotherapy drugs and new combinations of drugs improve cure rates?
Can the safety and effectiveness of stem cell transplants be improved on?
Can newer, targeted drugs such as monoclonal antibodies be helpful in treating NHL, either alone or added to current treatments to make them better? (See Other Drugs for Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma in Children.)
Can newer forms of immunotherapy (treatments that boost the immune system), such as CAR T-cell therapy or immune checkpoint inhibitors, be helpful in treating childhood NHL, especially if other treatments are no longer working?A risk factor is anything that might increase a person’s chances of getting cancer. Different cancers have different risk factors.
Lifestyle-related risk factors such as body weight, physical activity, diet, and the use of tobacco or alcohol play a major role in many adult cancers. But these factors usually take many years to influence cancer risk, and they are not thought to have much of an effect on the risk of childhood cancers, including non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL).
Researchers have found some factors that can increase a child’s risk of NHL. But most children with NHL do not have any known risk factors that can be changed.
Age, sex, and race
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma is rare in children in general, but it is more common in older children than in younger ones. It is also more common in boys than in girls and in White children than in Black children. The reasons for these differences are not clear.
Having a weakened immune system
Some types of immune system problems have been linked with a higher risk of NHL in children and teens.
Congenital (present at birth) immune deficiency syndromes
Some children are born with an abnormal immune system because of a genetic (inherited) syndrome. Along with an increased risk of serious infections, these children also have a higher risk of developing NHL (and sometimes other cancers as well). These syndromes include:

Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
Nijmegen syndrome
Ataxia-telangiectasia
Common variable immunodeficiency
X-linked lymphoproliferative syndrome

Organ transplants
Children who have had organ transplants are treated with drugs that weaken their immune system to prevent it from attacking the new organ. These children have an increased risk of developing NHL that is almost always caused by Epstein-Barr virus infection (see below). The risk depends on which drugs and what doses are used.
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection and AIDS
Infection with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, can weaken the immune system. Children with HIV generally get the infection from contact with their mother's blood, usually before or during birth. Because HIV infection is a risk factor for developing NHL, doctors may recommend that children with NHL be tested for HIV infection.
Epstein-Barr virus infection
In areas of Africa where Burkitt lymphoma is common, chronic infection with both malaria and the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is an important risk factor. EBV has been linked with almost all Burkitt lymphomas in Africa. In the United States, EBV has been linked with about 15% of Burkitt lymphomas. It is also linked to most lymphomas that occur after an organ transplant.
EBV infection is life-long, although it doesn't cause serious problems in most people. In Americans who are first infected with EBV as teens or young adults, it can cause infectious mononucleosis, sometimes known simply as mono. Most Americans have been infected with EBV by the time they are adults, but the infection seems to occur later in life in the United States than in Africa, which may help explain why it is less likely to cause childhood lymphoma here.
Exactly how EBV is linked to NHL is not completely understood, but it seems to have to do with the ability of the virus to infect and alter B lymphocytes. (For more information, see What Causes Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma in Children?)
Radiation exposure
Radiation exposure may be a minor risk factor in childhood NHL.
Survivors of atomic bomb exposures and nuclear reactor accidents have an increased risk of developing some types of cancer. Leukemia and thyroid cancers are the most common, but there is a slightly increased risk of NHL as well.
Patients treated with radiation therapy for other cancers have a slightly increased risk of NHL later in life. But it usually takes many years for this to develop, so these secondary cases of NHL are more common in adults than in children.
The possible risks from fetal or childhood exposure to lower levels of radiation, such as from x-ray tests or CT scans, are not known for sure. If there is an increase in risk for NHL or other cancers it is likely to be small, but to be safe, most doctors recommend that pregnant women and children not get these tests unless they are absolutely needed.
Other possible risk factors
Some research has suggested that a family history of NHL (in a brother, sister, or parent) might raise the risk of lymphoma. Lymphoma risk may also be higher in children of older mothers. More research is needed to confirm these findings, but if there is an increased risk tied to these factors, it is likely to be small.The exact cause of most cases of childhood non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is not known. However, scientists have found that the risk of this cancer is higher if a child or teen has any of the conditions described in Risk Factors for Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma in Children. Many of these conditions are related to problems with the immune system.
Lymphoma is a cancer that starts in cells called lymphocytes, which are a type of white blood cell. Scientists have found that certain changes in the DNA inside normal lymphocytes can make them become lymphoma cells. DNA is the chemical in our cells that makes up our genes, which control how our cells function. We look like our parents because they are the source of our DNA. But our genes affect more than the way we look.
Some genes control when our cells grow, divide into new cells, and die:

Genes that normally help cells grow, divide, and stay alive can sometimes change to become oncogenes.
Genes that help keep cell division under control, repair mistakes in DNA, or cause cells to die at the right time are called tumor suppressor genes.

Cancers can be caused by DNA mutations (changes) that create oncogenes, or that turn off tumor suppressor genes.
Inherited versus acquired gene changes
Some people inherit DNA changes from a parent that increase their risk for certain types of cancer. For example, some children inherit DNA changes that result in them having a weakened immune system, which can increase their risk for NHL. But this is not common.
More often, DNA changes related to NHL occur during life rather than having been inherited before birth. In some cases, these acquired changes result from an outside exposure to radiation or other factors, such as treatment for another condition that results in a weakened immune system. But in many cases, acquired gene changes seem to occur randomly, without having an outside cause.
The combination of immune deficiencies (from inherited conditions, medical treatment, or HIV infection) and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection can cause some types of NHL. EBV infects B lymphocytes. It can make the cells grow, divide, and live longer than they should. In young adults, EBV often causes infectious mononucleosis, also known as mono. Mono is usually not a serious disease because the person’s immune system destroys the B cells that are infected with EBV. But when a child has an immune deficiency, EBV-infected B cells may grow and build up. These cells have an increased risk for DNA changes. If these changes affect certain oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes, lymphoma may develop.
Most children and teens who develop NHL in the United States do not have an immune deficiency or evidence of EBV infection. Even though researchers have found many of the key DNA changes in lymphoma cells, they still don't know what causes them in children and teens who don't have these risk factors.The risk of many adult cancers can be reduced by doing certain things such as staying at a healthy weight or quitting smoking, but there is no known way to prevent most childhood cancers.
Most children (and adults) with non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) have no risk factors that can be changed, so at this time there is no way to prevent these lymphomas. For now, the best way to reduce the risk for NHL is to try to prevent known risk factors such as having a weakened immune system.
The most common cause of acquired immune system problems is HIV infection. HIV is spread among adults mostly through unprotected sex and sharing contaminated needles. Children generally get HIV infection from contact with their mother’s blood, usually before or during birth. Treating a pregnant woman who is HIV-positive with anti-HIV drugs can greatly reduce the risk of infecting her infant. HIV can also be passed on in breast milk, so HIV-positive mothers are advised not to breastfeed.
Some cases of NHL result from children being given immune-suppressing drugs to avoid rejection of transplanted organs, or from children getting chemotherapy or radiation to treat another type of cancer. Doctors are trying to find better ways to treat these conditions without raising the risk of lymphoma. But for now, the small risk of developing NHL several years later because of treatment must be balanced against the risks of these life-threatening conditions themselves.
Because most children and teens with NHL do not have known risk factors that can be changed, it’s important to note that there is nothing these children or their parents could have done to prevent this cancer.Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is uncommon in children and teens, and there are no widely recommended screening tests for this cancer. (Screening is testing for cancer in people who don't have any symptoms.) Still, sometimes NHL can be found early.
The best way to find lymphoma early is to be aware of its possible signs and symptoms and to take your child to the doctor if something concerns you.
Careful, regular medical checkups are important for children, especially those with known risk factors for NHL, such as:

Certain inherited immune deficiencies
Prior cancer treatment or organ transplant
HIV infection

Most children and teens with these conditions do not develop NHL, but it's important for parents and doctors to know the possible symptoms and signs of lymphoma.Childhood non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) can cause many different signs and symptoms, depending on the type of NHL and where it is in the body. Common symptoms include:

Enlarged lymph nodes (seen or felt as lumps under the skin)
Abdominal (belly) swelling or pain
Feeling full after eating only a small amount of food
Shortness of breath, wheezing, or cough
Fever
Weight loss
Night sweats
Fatigue (feeling very tired)

Enlarged lymph nodes
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma may grow in lymph nodes under the skin (on the sides of the neck, in the underarm area, above the collar bone, or in the groin area). The enlarged nodes are often seen or felt as lumps under the skin and are not usually painful. They are often first noticed by the child, parent, or a health care provider.
Enlarged lymph nodes in children are more often caused by infections than by NHL. Lymph nodes that grow in reaction to infection are called reactive nodes or hyperplastic nodes and are often tender to the touch.
Lymphoma in the abdomen (belly)
Lymphoma growing inside the abdomen can cause swelling or pain in the abdomen. There may also be a buildup of fluid that causes even more swelling.
Lymphoma can sometimes enlarge the spleen, which might then press on the stomach. This can cause a loss of appetite and feeling of fullness after only a small meal.
When lymphoma causes swelling in or near the stomach or intestines, bowel movements may be blocked, which may lead to belly pain, nausea, and vomiting.
Lymphoma might also block urine from leaving the kidneys. This can lead to low urine output.
Lymphoma in the chest
When lymphoma starts in the thymus (a small organ in the middle of the chest) or lymph nodes in the chest, it can press on the nearby trachea (windpipe). This can lead to coughing, wheezing, shortness of breath, and trouble breathing.
The superior vena cava (SVC) is a large vein that carries blood from the head and arms back to the heart. It passes next to the thymus and lymph nodes inside the chest. Lymphomas in this area may press on the SVC, which can make the blood back up in the veins. This is can lead to swelling in the face, neck, arms, and upper chest (sometimes with a bluish-red skin color). It can also cause trouble breathing, as well as headaches, dizziness, and a change in consciousness if it affects the brain. This condition, known as SVC syndrome, can be life-threatening, so it needs to be treated right away.
Lymphoma in the brain and spinal cord
Some types of lymphoma can spread to the area around the brain and spinal cord. This can cause problems such as headache, nausea, vision changes, facial numbness, and trouble talking.
Lymphoma in the skin
Some lymphomas can affect the skin itself. They can cause itchy, red or purple lumps or nodules under the skin.
General lymphoma symptoms (B symptoms)
Along with causing symptoms in the part of the body where it starts, NHL can also cause general symptoms such as:

Fever and chills
Sweating (particularly at night)
Unexplained weight loss

When talking about lymphoma, doctors sometimes call these B symptoms. B symptoms are often found in more rapidly growing lymphomas.
Sometimes lymphoma can spread to the bone marrow and crowd out the normal, healthy cells that make new blood cells. This can cause low blood cell counts and can lead to problems like:

Severe or frequent infections (from low white blood cell counts)
Easy bruising or bleeding (from low blood platelet counts)
Fatigue and pale skin (from low red blood cell counts)

Many of the signs and symptoms above are more likely to be caused by something other than a lymphoma, such as an infection. Still, if your child or teen has any of these symptoms, check with the doctor so that the cause can be found and treated, if needed.Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is usually found when a child or teen is brought to a doctor because of signs or symptoms they are having. This might lead the doctor to suspect lymphoma, but tests will be needed to confirm it.
The exams and tests below might be done to diagnose lymphoma, to find out what type it is, and to learn how advanced it is.
Medical history and physical exam
The doctor will ask about any symptoms, including how long they have been present, and might also ask about possible risk factors, such as immune system problems.
The physical exam will probably focus on any enlarged lymph nodes or other areas of concern. For example, the abdomen (belly) may be felt to see if the spleen or liver is enlarged.
The most common cause of enlarged lymph nodes in children is an infection, so this is often what doctors think of first. Because of this, the diagnosis of NHL in a child can sometimes be delayed. Children with swollen lymph nodes might be watched closely for a time or given a course of antibiotics first to see if the nodes will shrink. If they don't, more tests will be done, such as a biopsy to remove part or all of a swollen node (see next section). But if the lymph nodes seem to be growing quickly or the child’s health seems to be getting worse, a biopsy may be needed right away.
Biopsy
Lymphoma can't be diagnosed in a child based only on symptoms or a physical exam. Most of the symptoms NHL can cause are more often caused by other problems, like infections. They may also be caused by other kinds of cancers. And if a child does have NHL, it’s important to know which type it is, because some types are treated differently.
The only way to be sure of the diagnosis is to remove some or all of an abnormal lymph node (or tumor) to look at it with a microscope and do other lab tests. This is called a biopsy.
Types of biopsies used to diagnose non-Hodgkin lymphoma
There are different types of biopsies. Doctors choose which one to use based on the situation. The goal is to get a sample large enough to make an accurate diagnosis as quickly as possible, with as few side effects as possible.
Surgical (open) biopsy: In this procedure, either an entire lymph node (an excisional biopsy) or a small part of a large tumor (an incisional biopsy) is removed through a cut in the skin.
If it can be done, this type of biopsy is usually preferred when lymphoma is suspected, as it almost always provides enough of a sample to diagnose the exact type of NHL.
If the area to be biopsied is a lymph node near the skin surface, this might be done with either local anesthesia (numbing medicine at the biopsy site) and sedation, or with general anesthesia (where the child is in a deep sleep). If the node (or tumor) is inside the chest or abdomen, general anesthesia typically is needed.
Needle biopsy: These biopsies use hollow needles to remove small pieces of tissue. There are 2 main types:

In a fine needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy, the doctor uses a very thin, hollow needle attached to a syringe to withdraw (aspirate) a small amount of tissue from an enlarged lymph node or a tumor mass.
For a core needle biopsy, the doctor uses a larger needle to remove a slightly larger piece of tissue.

If an enlarged lymph node is just below the skin, the doctor can aim the needle while feeling the node. If the enlarged node or tumor is deep in the body (such as in the chest or abdomen), the doctor can guide the needle while watching it on an imaging test such as a CT scan or ultrasound (described later in this section).
The main advantage of a needle biopsy is that it does not require surgery. This can be especially important for children with tumors in the chest, because general anesthesia (where the child is in a deep sleep) can sometimes be dangerous for these children. A needle biopsy can also be useful when the lymphoma is in a place other than the lymph nodes, such as the bones.
In children, needle biopsies can often be done using local anesthesia to numb the area, along with sedation to make the child sleepy. General anesthesia is needed less often.
The main drawback of needle biopsies (especially FNA) is that sometimes the needle might not remove enough to make a definite diagnosis. Most doctors don’t use needle biopsies if they strongly suspect lymphoma (unless other types of biopsies can’t be done for some reason). But if the doctor suspects that lymph node swelling is caused by an infection (even after antibiotics), a needle biopsy may be the first type of biopsy done. Even after a needle biopsy has been done, a surgical biopsy might still be needed to diagnose and classify the lymphoma.
After lymphoma has been diagnosed, needle biopsies are sometimes used to check areas in other parts of the body where lymphoma might be spreading or coming back after treatment.
Other types of biopsies
Other types of biopsies are not normally used to diagnose lymphoma, but they might be done if a lymphoma has already been diagnosed to help show how far it has spread.
Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy
These tests can show if a lymphoma has reached the bone marrow. The 2 tests are usually done at the same time. Biopsy samples are usually taken from the back of the pelvic (hip) bones, although sometimes they may be taken from the front of the hip bones or from other bones.
For a bone marrow aspiration, the skin over the hip and the surface of the bone is numbed with local anesthetic. In most cases, children will be given other medicines to make them drowsy or asleep during the biopsy. A thin, hollow needle is then inserted into the bone, and a syringe is used to suck out a small amount of liquid bone marrow.
A bone marrow biopsy is usually done just after the aspiration. A small piece of bone and some marrow is removed with a slightly larger needle that is put into the bone. After the biopsy is done, pressure will be put on the site to help stop any bleeding.
Lumbar puncture (spinal tap)
This test is used to look for lymphoma cells in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), which is the fluid that surrounds the brain and spinal cord.
For this test, an area in the lower part of the back near the spine is numbed. Usually the child also is given medicine to make them sleep during the procedure. A small, hollow needle is then placed between the bones of the spine to withdraw some of the fluid.
If a child has already been diagnosed with lymphoma, a lumbar puncture can also be used to put chemotherapy drugs into the CSF to try to prevent or treat the spread of lymphoma to the spinal cord and brain.
Pleural or peritoneal fluid sampling
Lymphoma that has spread to the thin membranes that line the inside of the chest and abdomen can cause fluid to build up. Pleural fluid (inside the chest) or peritoneal fluid (inside the belly) can be removed by putting a hollow needle through the skin into the chest or abdomen.

When this procedure is used to remove fluid from the chest, it’s called a thoracentesis.
When it's used to collect fluid from inside the belly, it’s known as a paracentesis.

Before the procedure, the doctor uses a local anesthetic to numb the skin and may give the child other medicines so they are drowsy or asleep during the procedure. The fluid is then drawn out and checked for lymphoma cells.
Lab tests on biopsy samples
All biopsy samples and fluids are looked at by a pathologist (a doctor specially trained in using lab tests to identify cancer cells). The doctor uses a microscope to look at the size and shape of the cells and how they are arranged. This can show if a child has lymphoma, and sometimes what type of lymphoma it is. But usually other types of lab tests will be needed as well.
Flow cytometry and immunohistochemistry
For flow cytometry and immunohistochemistry tests, samples of cells are treated with antibodies (proteins that stick only to certain other proteins on cells). For immunohistochemistry, the cells are then looked at with a microscope to see if the antibodies stuck to them (meaning they have these proteins), while flow cytometry uses a special machine to look at them.
These tests can help determine if a lymph node is swollen because of lymphoma, some other cancer, or a non-cancerous disease. The tests can also be used for immunophenotyping (determining which type of lymphoma a child has, based on certain proteins in or on the cells). Different types of lymphocytes (the cells from which lymphomas start) have different proteins on their surface, which relate to the type of lymphocyte and how mature it is.
Chromosome tests
These tests evaluate the chromosomes (long strands of DNA) in the lymphoma cells. In some types of lymphoma, the cells have chromosome changes such as having too many, too few, or other abnormalities. These changes can often help identify the type of lymphoma.

Cytogenetics: In this test, the cells are looked at under a microscope to see if the chromosomes have any abnormalities. A drawback of this test is that it usually takes about 2 to 3 weeks because the lymphoma cells must grow in lab dishes before their chromosomes are ready to be seen with a microscope.
Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH): This test looks more closely at lymphoma cell DNA using fluorescent dyes that only attach to specific gene or chromosome changes. FISH can find most chromosome changes (such as translocations) that can be seen under a microscope on standard cytogenetic tests, as well as some changes too small to be seen with usual cytogenetic testing. FISH is very accurate and results are usually ready within a couple of days.
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR): This is a very sensitive DNA test that can also find some chromosome changes too small to be seen with a microscope, even if there are very few lymphoma cells in a sample.

For more information, see Testing Biopsy and Cytology Specimens for Cancer.
Blood tests
Blood tests measure the amounts of certain types of cells and chemicals in the blood. They are not used to diagnose lymphoma, but they might be one of the first types of tests done in children with symptoms to help determine what is going on. If a child has been diagnosed with lymphoma, these tests can also sometimes help show how advanced the lymphoma is.

A complete blood count (CBC) measures the levels of different cells in the blood, such as the red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets. In children already known to have lymphoma, low blood cell counts might mean that the lymphoma is growing in the bone marrow and damaging new blood cell production. In children getting chemotherapy, this test can also be used to see if treatment is affecting the bone marrow.
Blood levels of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) may be checked. LDH is often abnormally high in patients with fast-growing lymphomas.
Blood chemistry tests can help detect liver or kidney problems caused by the spread of lymphoma cells or certain chemotherapy drugs. These tests can also help determine if treatment is needed to correct low or high blood levels of certain minerals.
Tests may also be done to make sure the blood is clotting properly.
For some types of lymphoma, other blood tests might be done to see if the child has been infected with certain viruses, such as the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), or human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Infections with some of these viruses can affect the way your child will be treated.

Imaging tests
Imaging tests use x-rays, sound waves, magnetic fields, or radioactive substances to create pictures of the inside of the body. These tests might be done for a number of reasons, including:

To look for possible causes of certain symptoms (such as trouble breathing)
To help determine the stage (extent) of the lymphoma, once it has been diagnosed
To help show if treatment is working
To look for possible signs of lymphoma coming back after treatment

A child with a known or suspected lymphoma might need one or more of these tests.
Chest x-ray
A chest x-ray may be done to look for enlarged lymph nodes inside the chest. But this test isn’t likely to be needed if a CT scan of the chest is done.
Computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan
A CT scan combines many x-rays to make detailed, cross-sectional images of the body. CT scans are often used to look for enlarged lymph nodes or other masses in the neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis.
During the test, your child will need to lie still on a table that slides in and out of the ring-shaped scanner. Some younger children may be given medicine to help keep them calm or even asleep during the test to help make sure the pictures come out well.
CT-guided needle biopsy: A CT scan can also be used to guide a biopsy needle precisely into a suspected tumor or enlarged lymph node. For this procedure, the child remains asleep on the CT scanning table, while the doctor advances a biopsy needle through the skin and toward the area. CT scans are repeated until the needle is in the right place. The biopsy sample is then removed and looked at in the lab.
Ultrasound (sonogram)
Ultrasound uses sound waves and their echoes to create pictures of internal organs or masses.
Ultrasound can be used to look at lymph nodes near the surface of the body or to look inside the abdomen (belly) for enlarged lymph nodes or organs such as the liver or spleen. It can also show if the kidneys have become swollen if the outflow of urine has been blocked by enlarged lymph nodes.
Ultrasound-guided needle biopsy: Ultrasound is also sometimes used to help guide a biopsy needle into an enlarged lymph node.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan
An MRI, like a CT scan, shows detailed images of soft tissues in the body. But MRI scans use radio waves and strong magnets to make pictures, instead of x-rays.
This test is not used as often as CT scans for lymphoma, but MRI is very useful for looking at the brain and spinal cord if a child has symptoms that might be caused by problems in the nervous system.
MRIs take longer than CT scans, often up to an hour. Your child may have to lie inside a narrow tube, which can be distressing, so sedation is sometimes needed. Newer, more open MRI machines may be another option, although your child will still have to lie still.
Positron emission tomography (PET) scan
For a PET scan, a slightly radioactive sugar is injected into the blood. (The amount of radioactivity used is very low and will pass out of the body within a day or so.) Because lymphoma cells grow quickly, they absorb more of the sugar. After about an hour, your child will be moved onto a table in the PET scanner. They will lie on the table for about 30 minutes while a special camera creates a picture of areas of radioactivity in the body. Younger children may be given medicine to help keep them calm or even asleep during the test.
The picture from a PET scan is not detailed like a CT or MRI scan, but it provides helpful information about the whole body.
PET scans can be used for many reasons in a child with lymphoma:

They can help tell if an enlarged lymph node contains lymphoma
They can help spot small areas in the body that might be lymphoma, even if the area looks normal on a CT scan
They can help tell if a lymphoma is responding to treatment. Some doctors will repeat the PET scan after 1 or 2 courses of chemotherapy. If the chemo is working, the lymphoma will no longer show up as well on the scan.
They can be used after treatment to help decide if an enlarged lymph node still contains lymphoma or is just scar tissue

PET/CT or PET/MRI scan: Some newer machines can do a PET as well as a CT or MRI scan at the same time. This lets the doctor compare areas of higher radioactivity on the PET scan with the more detailed appearance of that area on the CT or MRI scan.
Bone scan
A bone scan is not usually needed unless a child has bone pain or has lab test results that suggest the lymphoma might have reached the bones.
For this test, a radioactive substance called technetium is injected into the blood. (The amount of radioactivity used is very low and will pass out of the body within a day or so. Technetium travels to damaged areas of the bone over a couple of hours. Your child then lies on a table while a special camera detects the radioactivity and creates a picture of the skeleton. Younger children may be given medicine to help keep them calm or even asleep during the test.
A bone scan can detect bone damage from lymphoma. But it may also show other things that are not cancer, so other tests might be needed to be sure.What is the stage of a lymphoma?
A lymphoma's stage tells you how much and where the cancer is in the body when it is first diagnosed. Along with the type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), the stage is important in determining the treatment options and prognosis (outlook) for a child or teen with NHL.
The stage is based on the results of physical exams, biopsies, and imaging tests (CT scan, PET scan, etc.), which are described in Tests for Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma in Children.
A staging system describes how far a cancer has spread in a standard way. The system most often used to describe the spread of NHL in children is the International Pediatric Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma Staging System (IPNHLSS), which is a modified version of the older St. Jude staging system. This system is different from the one used for lymphomas in adults.
International Pediatric Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma Staging System (IPNHLSS)
The IPNHLSS divides childhood NHL into 4 stages:

Stage I and II lymphomas are usually considered limited-stage disease and are treated the same way.
Stage III and IV lymphomas are usually thought of as advanced-stage disease and are also treated alike.

Stage I
The lymphoma is in only one place, either as a single tumor not in lymph nodes, or in lymph nodes in one part of the body (the neck, groin, underarm, etc.). The lymphoma is not in the chest or abdomen (belly).
Stage II
Stage II lymphomas are not in the chest, and one of the following applies:

The lymphoma is a single tumor and is also in nearby lymph nodes in only one part of the body (the neck, groin, underarm, etc.).
The lymphoma is in more than one set of lymph nodes, all of which are either above or below the diaphragm (the thin breathing muscle that separates the chest and abdomen). For example, this might mean nodes in the underarm and neck area are affected but not the combination of underarm and groin nodes.
The lymphoma started in the digestive tract (usually at the end of the small intestine) and can be removed by surgery. It might or might not have reached nearby lymph nodes.

Stage III
For stage III lymphomas, one of the following applies:

The lymphoma started in the chest (usually in the thymus, the lymph nodes in the center of the chest, or the lining of the lung).
The lymphoma started in the abdomen and has spread too widely within the abdomen to be removed completely by surgery.
The lymphoma is next to the spine (and may be elsewhere as well).
The lymphoma is more than one tumor outside of the lymph nodes, which might be above or below the diaphragm (the thin breathing muscle that separates the chest and abdomen). This might include tumors in the bones or skin.
The lymphoma is in more than one set of lymph nodes above and below the diaphragm. For example, the lymphoma is in both underarm and groin lymph nodes.
The lymphoma is a single tumor in a bone, and it is in a nearby area as well (either in or outside the lymph nodes).

Stage IV
The lymphoma is in the central nervous system (brain or spinal cord) and/or the bone marrow when it is first found. (If more than 25% of the bone marrow is made up of cancer cells, called blasts, the cancer is classified as acute lymphoblastic leukemia [ALL] instead of lymphoma.)
Lymphoma staging can be confusing. If you are unsure about what it means for your child, ask your child’s doctor to explain it to you.
Other prognostic factors
Along with the stage of the lymphoma (and the type of lymphoma), some other factors can also affect a child’s outlook (prognosis). These include:

The child’s age (younger children tend to do better.)
The blood LDH level (children with lower LDH levels tend to do better.)
Where the lymphoma is in the body
How well the lymphoma responds to initial treatment

If you have questions about what these prognostic factors might mean for your child, ask your child’s doctor to explain them to you.Survival rates are one way to get an idea of the outlook for children and teens with a certain type and stage of cancer. They can’t tell exactly what will happen with any person, but they may help give you a better understanding about how likely it is that treatment will be successful.
What is a survival rate?
Statistics on the outlook (prognosis) for a certain type and stage of cancer are often given as survival rates. For example, the 5-year survival rate is the percentage of people who live at least 5 years after being diagnosed with cancer. A 5-year survival rate of 80% means that an estimated 80 out of 100 people who have that cancer are still alive 5 years after being diagnosed. Of course, many of these people live much longer than 5 years. 
Many cancer doctors prefer not to use the word “cure” when discussing cancer treatment and prognosis (outlook), because it can be hard to know for sure that all of the cancer is gone after treatment. But when it comes to children and teens with non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), those who are still alive and free of lymphoma after 5 years are very likely to have been cured, as it’s rare for these cancers to return after this much time.
Survival rates don’t tell the whole story
Survival rates are often based on previous outcomes of large numbers of children who had the disease, but they can’t predict for sure what will happen in any particular child’s case. There are some limitations to keep in mind:

The outlook for children and teens with NHL varies by the type and stage (extent) of the lymphoma. But other factors can also affect a child’s outlook, such as the location and size of the tumor(s), and how well the lymphoma responds to treatment. The outlook for each child is unique based on their circumstances.
The numbers below are among the most current available. But to get these survival rates, doctors have to look at children who were treated at least several years ago. As treatments are improving over time, children who are now being diagnosed with NHL may have a better outlook than these statistics show.

Your child’s doctor can tell you how these numbers might apply to your child’s particular situation.
Survival rates for childhood non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Advances in treatment have increased the overall survival rates for children and teens with NHL dramatically in recent decades.  
The ranges of numbers given below are based on the results of several studies that have used different treatment regimens or included slightly different groups of patients.
Lymphoblastic lymphoma
With intensive treatment, the long-term survival rate for children and teens with limited stage (stage I or II) lymphoblastic lymphoma is higher than 90%.
The long-term survival rate for more advanced (stage III or IV) lymphoblastic lymphomas is generally higher than 80%.
Burkitt and Burkitt-like lymphoma
Treatment of limited stage (stage I and II) Burkitt lymphomas is usually very successful, with a long-term survival rate of over 90%.
The long-term survival rate for children and teens with more advanced (stage III or IV) Burkitt lymphoma ranges from about 80% to 90%.
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
The long-term survival rate is over 90% for limited stage (stage I and II) diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL).
The long-term survival rate for children and teens with advanced (stage III or IV) DLBCL ranges from about 80% to 90%.
Anaplastic large cell lymphoma
The long-term survival rate for limited stage anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) is about 90%.
ALCL is more likely to be advanced at the time it is diagnosed, for which the long-term survival rate is in the range of 60% to 75%.
Remember, all of these survival rates are only estimates – they can't predict what will happen with any child. We understand that these statistics can be confusing and may lead you to have more questions. Talk to your child's doctor if you'd like to get a better understanding of what these numbers mean.It is important to have open, honest discussions with your child’s cancer care team. Ask any question, no matter how minor it might seem. For instance, consider asking these questions:
When you're told your child has non-Hodgkin lymphoma

What type of non-Hodgkin lymphoma does my child have?
What is the stage (extent) of the lymphoma, and what does that mean?
What tests need to be done before we can decide on treatment?
Do we need to see any other types of doctors?

When deciding on a treatment plan

How much experience do you have treating this type of lymphoma?
What are our treatment options?
What treatment do you recommend and why?
Should we get a second opinion before starting treatment? If so, can you suggest a doctor or cancer center?
How soon do we need to start treatment?
What should we do to be ready for treatment?
Who else will be on the treatment team, and what do they do?
How long will treatment last? What will it be like? Where will it be done?
How much of the treatment will need to be done in the hospital?
How will treatment affect our daily lives?
What are the risks and side effects of treatment?
Which side effects start shortly after treatment and which ones might develop later on?
Will treatment affect my child’s ability to learn, grow, and develop?
What are the chances of curing the lymphoma?
What will our options be if the treatment doesn’t work or if the lymphoma comes back?

You should also talk with your child’s doctor before treatment to find out about the possible long-term side effects. For example, you might want to ask about how treatment could affect your child’s fertility later on. Here are some questions you might want to ask about the risks of infertility with treatment:

Will this treatment affect my child’s ability to have children someday?
Can anything be done to prevent or lower the risk of infertility? Would this interfere with my child’s cancer treatment?
Should we talk to a fertility specialist?
Once my child finishes treatment, how will we know if they might have fertility problems?

During treatment
Once treatment begins, you’ll need to know what to expect and what to look for. Not all of these questions may apply, but getting answers to the ones that do could be helpful.

How will we know if the treatment is working?
Is there anything we can do to help manage side effects?
What symptoms or side effects should we tell you about right away?
How can we reach you or someone on your team on nights, weekends, or holidays?
Are there any limits on what my child can do during treatment? 

After treatment

What type of follow-up will my child need after treatment?
Are there any limits on what they can do after treatment?
What symptoms should we watch for?
How will we know if the lymphoma has come back? What will our options be if that happens?
Do you know of any local or online support groups where we can talk to other families who are coping with childhood lymphoma?

Along with these examples, be sure to ask any other questions you might have. For instance, you might want more information about recovery times so that you can plan work and school schedules. Or you might want to know more about clinical trials.
Keep in mind that doctors aren’t the only ones who can give you information. Other health care professionals, such as nurses and social workers, can answer some of your questions. To find out more about communicating with your health care team, see The Doctor-Patient Relationship.Chemotherapy (chemo) is the main treatment for non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) in children and teens. Chemo drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach nearly all areas of the body, making this treatment very useful for cancers that spread widely, such as childhood NHL.
Chemo drugs used to treat non-Hodgkin lymphoma in children
Children and teens with NHL get a combination of several chemo drugs over a period of time. The number of drugs, their doses, and the length of treatment depend on the type and stage of the lymphoma. Some of the chemo drugs commonly used to treat childhood lymphoma include:

Cyclophosphamide
Vincristine
Doxorubicin (Adriamycin)
Prednisone
Dexamethasone
Cytarabine, also known as ara-C
Methotrexate
L-asparaginase, PEG-L-asparaginase (pegaspargase)
Etoposide
6-mercaptopurine
Ifosfamide

How is chemo given?
Doctors give chemo in cycles, in which a period of treatment is followed by a rest period to allow the body time to recover. Each chemo cycle generally lasts for several weeks.
Chemo drugs are usually given into a vein (IV) or taken by mouth. If there’s a chance the lymphoma may have reached the brain or spinal cord, chemo may also be given into the cerebrospinal fluid (known as intrathecal chemo).
Most chemo treatments are given in an outpatient setting (in the doctor’s office or clinic or hospital outpatient department), but some – especially at the start of treatment – may need to be given while the child stays in the hospital.
Often before chemo is about to start, surgery is done to insert a small plastic tube, called a central venous catheter (CVC) or venous access device (VAD), into a large blood vessel. The end of the tube stays just under the skin or sticks out in the chest area or upper arm. The CVC is left in place during treatment (often for many months) to give IV drugs such as chemo and to take blood samples. This lowers the number of needle sticks needed during treatment.
Possible risks and side effects of chemo
Chemo drugs can cause side effects. These depend on the type and dose of drugs given and how long treatment lasts.

Common chemo side effects can include:

Hair loss
Mouth sores
Loss of appetite
Nausea and vomiting
Diarrhea or constipation
Increased chance of infections (due to low white blood cell counts)
Easy bruising or bleeding (due to low blood platelet counts)
Fatigue (due to low red blood cell counts)

These side effects usually go away after treatment is finished. If serious side effects occur, the dose of chemo may need to be reduced or treatment may need to be delayed.
There are often ways to lessen these side effects. For example:

Drugs can be given to help prevent or reduce nausea and vomiting.
Infections can be very serious in children getting chemo. Drugs known as growth factors can be given to keep the blood cell counts higher.

Tumor lysis syndrome is a possible side effect of chemo in children who have large numbers of lymphoma cells in the body before treatment. It occurs most often with the first cycle of chemo. Killing the lymphoma cells releases their contents into the bloodstream. This can overwhelm the kidneys, which can’t get rid of all of these substances at once. Excessive amounts of certain minerals may also lead to heart and nervous system problems. The risk of tumor lysis syndrome happening can be lowered by making sure the child gets lots of fluids during treatment and by giving drugs such as bicarbonate, allopurinol, and rasburicase, which help the body get rid of these substances.
Side effects of certain chemo drugs
Some possible side effects occur only with certain drugs. For example:
Cyclophosphamide and ifosfamide can damage the bladder, which can cause blood in the urine. The risk of this can be lowered by giving the drugs with plenty of fluids and with a drug called mesna, which helps protect the bladder. These drugs can also damage the ovaries or testicles, which could affect fertility (the ability to have children).
Doxorubicin can damage the heart. Doctors try to reduce this risk as much as possible by limiting the doses of doxorubicin and by checking the heart with an echocardiogram (an ultrasound of the heart) during treatment. This drug can also cause skin damage if it should leak out of the vein while it is being given.
Vincristine and etoposide can cause nerve damage (neuropathy). Some patients may have tingling, numbness, weakness, or pain, particularly in the hands and feet.
Some chemo drugs, such as etoposide, can increase the risk of developing other cancers (especially leukemias) later in life. While this is a serious risk, it is not common, and the small increase in risk has to be weighed against the importance of chemotherapy in treating the lymphoma.
Be sure to ask your child’s doctor or nurse about any specific side effects you should watch for and about what you can do about them.
Along with the side effects listed above, there are possible long-term effects of chemo in children, such as possible effects on fertility later in life. These are described in Late and Long-term Effects of Treatment for Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma in Children.In recent years, drugs have been developed that target specific parts of cancer cells. These drugs work differently from standard chemotherapy (chemo) drugs, and they often have different side effects. Some of these drugs might be useful in certain cases of childhood non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), either by themselves or with chemo.
Monoclonal antibodies
Antibodies are proteins normally made by the body’s immune system to help fight infections. Lab-made versions, called monoclonal antibodies, can be designed to attack a specific target, such as a protein on the surface of lymphoma cells.
Several monoclonal antibodies are now used to treat lymphoma in adults. Some of these are now being studied or used in children as well.
Rituximab
This antibody attaches to the CD20 protein on the surface of some types of lymphoma cells, which causes the cells to die. Rituximab is often used with chemotherapy as part of the treatment for Burkitt lymphoma, Burkitt-like lymphoma, and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
Treatment is typically given as an intravenous (IV) infusion in the doctor’s office, clinic, or hospital.
Rituxan was the original brand name for rituximab, but several versions like it (called biosimilars) are now available as well, including Ruxience, Truxima, and Riabni.
Common side effects of rituximab are usually mild but can include chills, fever, nausea, rashes, fatigue, and headaches during or after the infusion. Side effects are less likely with later doses. Rituximab can also increase a person’s risk of some types of infections.
Brentuximab vedotin (Adcetris)
This is an antibody-drug conjugate (ADC), meaning it is an antibody (in this case, an anti-CD30 antibody) attached to a chemotherapy drug. Some lymphoma cells have the CD30 protein on their surface. The antibody acts like a homing signal, bringing the chemo drug to the lymphoma cells, where it enters the cells and kills them when they try to divide into new cells.
Brentuximab vedotin can be used to treat anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL), either along with chemo as part of the first treatment, or by itself for ALCL that has come back after other treatments. So far it has been used mainly in adults, but it's now being studied for use in children as well.
This drug is given as an infusion into a vein (IV), typically every 2 or 3 weeks.
Common side effects include nerve damage (neuropathy), low blood counts, fatigue, fever, nausea and vomiting, infections, diarrhea, and cough.
ALK inhibitors
In most children with ALCL, the ALK gene inside the ALCL cells is abnormal. ALK inhibitor drugs target cells with an abnormal ALK gene. These drugs have shown promising results in children with ALCL, usually after other treatments have been tried.
For example, crizotinib (Xalkori) can be used in children at least one year old who have ALCL that is no longer responding to other treatments. It is also being studied to be used with chemo as part of the first treatment for ALCL.  This drug is a pill, typically taken twice a day.
Other ALK inhibitors, such as brigatinib (Alunbrig), are now being studied as well.
Common side effects of crizotinib (and other ALK inhibitors) can include nausea and vomiting, diarrhea or constipation, mouth sores, headaches, feeling tired, loss of appetite, changes in vision, and muscle and joint pain.
Less common but more serious side effects can include inflammation (swelling) in the lungs or other parts of the body, liver damage, serious vision problems, and heart rhythm problems.
Other drugs that target parts of lymphoma cells are now being studied for use in children as well.High-dose chemotherapy and stem cell transplant (SCT) is not used as the first treatment for non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) in children, but a transplant may be an option if the first treatment does not work or if the lymphoma comes back after treatment.
The doses of chemotherapy (chemo) drugs normally are limited by the side effects these drugs can cause. Higher doses can’t be used, even if they might kill more cancer cells, because they would severely damage the bone marrow, where new blood cells are made. 
A stem cell transplant (also known as a bone marrow transplant) lets doctors give higher doses of chemotherapy (sometimes along with radiation therapy). After getting high-dose chemo, the child gets a transplant of blood-forming stem cells to restore the bone marrow.
Types of transplants
The main types of stem cell transplants are based on the source of the stem cells. 

In an autologous stem cell transplant, the child’s own stem cells are used. They are collected several times in the weeks before treatment. The cells are frozen and stored while the child gets treatment (high-dose chemo and/or radiation), and then are given back after treatment into the child’s blood by an IV.
In an allogeneic stem cell transplant, the stem cells come from someone else (a donor). Usually this is a brother or sister, although the source can be an unrelated donor or even umbilical cord blood. The donor’s tissue type (also known as the HLA type) needs to match the child’s tissue type as closely as possible to help prevent the risk of major problems with the transplant. Regardless of the source, the stem cells are frozen and stored until they are needed for the transplant.

Autologous SCTs are used more often than allogeneic SCTs to treat lymphoma in children. Still, using the child’s own stem cells may not be an option if the lymphoma has spread to the bone marrow. If that occurs, it may be hard to collect stem cells that are free of lymphoma cells. 
Allogeneic transplants aren't used as much to treat lymphoma because they can have severe side effects that make them hard to tolerate. It can also be hard to find a matched donor. 
A stem cell transplant is a complex treatment that can cause serious, possibly even life-threatening side effects. If your child’s doctors think they might benefit from a transplant, it should be done at a center where the staff has experience with the procedure and with managing the recovery phase.
If your child's cancer care team suggests a stem cell transplant, be sure to talk to them beforehand to learn about possible long-term effects your child may have. More information on possible long-term effects can be found in Late and Long-term Effects of Treatment for Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma in Children.Radiation therapy uses high-energy rays to kill cancer cells. This was once a very common treatment for children and teens with non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). But as doctors have developed more effective chemotherapy (chemo) and other drug treatments, radiation therapy has been used less.
When might radiation therapy be used in childhood NHL?
Radiation therapy might be used in a few instances.

Sometimes it is used along with chemo. This might be done if the lymphoma has reached the brain or spinal cord.
It may be used as a form of urgent treatment in children with symptoms caused by large tumors in the chest.
It may be used as part of treatment for children who are getting high-dose chemo and a stem cell transplant.
It can be used to relieve symptoms from lymphoma, such as pain from a tumor that's pressing on nerves.

How is radiation therapy given?
Radiation focused on a cancer from a machine outside the body is called external beam radiation. This is the type of radiation therapy most often used to treat childhood NHL.
Before the radiation treatment starts, the team will take careful measurements to determine the correct angles for aiming the radiation beams and the proper dose of radiation. This planning session, called simulation, often includes getting imaging tests such as CT or MRI scans.
The treatment itself is much like getting an x-ray, but the radiation is stronger. It is painless, but some younger children might need to be sedated to help make sure they don’t move during the treatment. Each treatment lasts only a few minutes, although the setup time – getting your child into place for treatment – usually takes longer. The number of treatments will depend on the reason they're being given.
Possible risks and side effects of radiation therapy
Short-term side effects of radiation therapy depend on where it is aimed. For example:

It may cause sunburn-like skin problems or hair loss in the area being treated.
Radiation therapy over large parts of the body can cause fatigue.
Radiation to the abdomen (belly) can sometimes cause nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea.

Often these effects go away after a short while.
Possible long-term side effects of radiation therapy in children and teens can be more serious, and some may not occur until many years later.

Radiation therapy to the chest may damage the lungs or heart, which could raise the risk of lung or heart problems later in life. In the long term, radiation to the chest may also increase the risk of lung cancer (especially in people who smoke) and of breast cancer.
Radiation therapy to the brain might cause headaches and problems such as memory loss, personality changes, and trouble learning at school.
Radiation to the abdomen in girls can damage the ovaries. This might lead to abnormal menstrual cycles or problems getting pregnant or having children later on.
Radiation to other parts of the body may slow a child’s growth or increase the risks for certain other cancers, such as those of muscle or bone (called sarcomas) or of the digestive tract.

Because of these possible long-term effects, doctors try to avoid using radiation therapy in children or limit the doses used whenever possible. For more on possible long-term effects, see Late and Long-term Effects of Treatment for Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma in Children.Surgery usually does not have a major role in treating childhood non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) since it’s unlikely to cure it by itself, and normal organs might be damaged in the process.
When might surgery be used?
Surgery is sometimes used as the first treatment for early-stage Burkitt lymphoma that is in only one area (such as part of the intestine) to try to remove as much of the tumor as possible before chemotherapy (chemo). If the lymphoma can be removed completely, doctors might be able to give a less intensive chemo regimen.
Other uses of surgery include:

To get biopsy samples for lab tests to determine the exact type of NHL a child has, if non-surgical procedures (needle biopsy, bone marrow biopsy, etc.) can't get enough tissue for testing.
To insert a small plastic tube, called a central venous catheter (CVC) or venous access device (VAD), into a large blood vessel near the heart. The end of the tube stays just under the skin or sticks out in the chest area or upper arm. This is left in place during treatment to give intravenous (IV) drugs such as chemo and to take blood samples. This lowers the number of needle sticks needed during treatment.
To relieve some emergency situations, such as if a lymphoma has blocked a child’s intestines.

Possible risks and side effects of surgery
Possible complications of surgery depend on the location and extent of the operation and the child’s health beforehand. Serious complications, although rare, can include problems with anesthesia, bleeding, blood clots, wound infections, and pneumonia. Most children will have some pain for a while after the operation, although this can usually be helped with medicines if needed.In general, children and teens with non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) are treated with chemotherapy (chemo), sometimes along with other drugs. But the exact treatment differs depending on the type and stage of the lymphoma. The treatment for NHL is intense and might cause serious side effects, so it's very important that it is given in a children’s cancer center, especially when it is first started.
Lymphomas in children and teens (especially Burkitt lymphomas) tend to grow very quickly and might already be quite large by the time they’re diagnosed, so it's important to start treatment as soon as possible.
Childhood lymphomas usually respond well to chemo, which can kill large numbers of lymphoma cells in a short period of time. Sometimes this can cause tumor lysis syndrome, a side effect in which chemicals from inside the dead cells enter the blood and can cause problems with the kidneys and other organs. Doctors try to prevent this by making sure the child gets lots of fluids before and during treatment, and by giving certain drugs to help the body get rid of these substances.
Even children and teens with early-stage (stage I or II) lymphomas are assumed to have more widespread disease than can be detected with exams or imaging tests. Because of this, local treatments such as surgery or radiation therapy alone are very unlikely to cure them. Therefore, chemotherapy is an important part of treatment for all childhood NHLs.
Treatment of lymphoblastic lymphoma (LBL)
Stages I and II: In general, treatment for early-stage LBL is similar to the treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Chemotherapy is given in 3 phases (induction, consolidation, and maintenance) using many chemo drugs. For example, the BFM regimen uses combinations of many different drugs for the first several months, followed by less intense treatment with methotrexate and 6-mercaptopurine in pill form for a total of about 2 years. Shorter and less intensive treatments, such as the chemo combinations called CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone) and COMP (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, methotrexate, and prednisone), have also been used.
Chemotherapy, usually with methotrexate and possibly 1 or 2 other drugs is also given into the spinal fluid (known as intrathecal chemo) for at least 4 doses, each separated by a week. This helps kill any lymphoma cells in the brain or spinal cord.
The total length of treatment may be as long as 2 years.
Stages III and IV: The treatment for children with advanced LBL is similar to that for earlier stage LBL, although it might be more intensive. It is given as 3 phases of chemo (induction, consolidation, and maintenance) using many drugs, and it lasts for about 2 years. This is very similar to the treatment of high-risk acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL).
Intrathecal chemo is also given into the spinal fluid to kill any lymphoma cells that may have reached the brain or spinal cord. In some cases, radiation therapy may be given to the brain and spinal cord as well.
Treatment of Burkitt lymphoma/Burkitt-like lymphoma and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
Chemotherapy (chemo), often along with the monoclonal antibody rituximab, is the main form of treatment for these lymphomas. This combination is sometimes called chemoimmunotherapy.
Stages I and II: While chemo (often along with rituximab) is the main treatment of these lymphomas, surgery may be done before chemo if the tumor is in only one area, such as a large abdominal (belly) tumor.
Several different chemo drugs are used. The length of treatment ranges from about 9 weeks to 6 months. Most pediatric oncologists feel that the 9-week treatment is adequate if all of the tumor is removed with surgery first.
Chemotherapy into the spinal fluid is needed only if the lymphoma is growing around the head or neck.
Stages III and IV: Children with more advanced lymphomas are generally treated with rituximab plus more intensive chemotherapy. Because these lymphomas tend to grow quickly, the chemo cycles are short, with little rest between courses of treatment.
For example, a treatment plan known as the French LMB protocol regimen alternates between different combinations of drugs every 3 to 4 weeks for a total of about 6 to 8 months. Other similar treatment regimens are the German BFM protocol and the St. Jude Total B regimen.
Chemotherapy must also be given into the spinal fluid.
Treatment of anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL)
Chemotherapy (chemo) is the main form of treatment for childhood ALCL. Studies are being done to determine if adding another drug to chemo, such as crizotinib (Xalkori) or brentuximab vedotin (Adcetris), might make treatment more effective.
Stages I and II: Treatment for these lymphomas usually consists of chemo with 4 or more drugs given for about 3 to 6 months. The usual chemo regimen contains a 4-drug combination of cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisone, and either doxorubicin or methotrexate. (These are known as the CHOP or COMP regimens.)
Chemo is given into the spinal fluid only if the lymphoma is near the head or neck.
Stages III and IV: ALCL doesn’t often reach the bone marrow or spinal fluid, but if it does, it requires more intensive treatment. Chemo typically includes several drugs given over 9 to 12 months.
Intrathecal chemotherapy is given into the spinal fluid as well.
Treatment of recurrent lymphoma
Generally, if the lymphoma comes back (recurs) after the first treatment, it is harder to treat. When possible, more intensive chemotherapy, usually including a stem cell transplant, is recommended. This is often done as part of a clinical trial.
For some types of childhood lymphoma, other types of treatment might be an option. For example, if ALCL is no longer responding or comes back after treatment, non-chemo drugs such as brentuximab vedotin or an ALK inhibitor (such as crizotinib) might be an option, if they haven’t been tried already.
Clinical trials of other new forms of treatment may also be an option for recurrent childhood NHL.During treatment for childhood non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), most families are mainly concerned with the daily aspects of getting through treatment and beating the lymphoma. After treatment, the concerns tend to shift toward the long-term effects of the lymphoma and its treatment, as well as the possibility of the lymphoma coming back (recurring).
It's certainly understandable for you to want to put lymphoma and its treatment behind you and to get back to a life that doesn’t revolve around cancer. But it’s important to realize that follow-up care is a central part of this process that offers your child the best chance for recovery and long-term survival.
Follow-up exams and tests
It's very important for your child to go to regular follow-up exams with the cancer care team for many years after treatment. The doctors will continue to watch for possible signs of lymphoma, as well as for short-term and long-term side effects of treatment. Doctor visits will be more frequent at first, but the time between visits may get longer as time goes on.
Checkups after treatment typically include physical exams, lab tests, and sometimes other tests such as CT, MRI, or PET scans. If the lymphoma does come back, it is usually while the child is still getting treatment or just after. It is unusual for childhood lymphoma to return if there are no signs of the disease within a year or so after treatment.
A benefit of follow-up care is that it gives you a chance to discuss questions and concerns that come up during and after your child’s recovery. For example, almost any cancer treatment can have side effects. Some might last for only a short time, but others can last longer or might not show up until months or even years later. It's important to report any new symptoms to the doctor right away so that the cause can be found and treated, if needed.
Ask your child’s doctor for a survivorship care plan
Talk with your child’s doctor about developing a survivorship care plan. This plan might include: 

A summary of the diagnosis, tests done, and treatment given
A suggested schedule for follow-up exams and tests
A schedule for other tests your child might need in the future, such as early detection (screening) tests for other types of cancer, or tests to look for long-term health effects from the lymphoma or its treatment
A list of possible late- or long-term side effects from your child’s treatment, including what to watch for and when to contact the doctor
Diet and physical activity suggestions

Keeping health insurance and records of your child’s medical care
As much as you might want to put the experience behind you once treatment is done, it’s very important to keep good records of your child’s medical care during this time. Eventually, your child will grow up, be on their own, and have new doctors. It’s important for them to be able to give the new doctors the details of their cancer diagnosis and treatment. Gathering the details soon after treatment may be easier than trying to get them at some point in the future.
Ask your cancer care team where and how to get this information. Learn more in Keeping Copies of Important Medical Records.
It’s also important to keep health insurance coverage. Tests and doctor visits can cost a lot, and even though no one wants to think of the lymphoma coming back, this could happen.
Can we lower the risk of the lymphoma progressing or coming back?
If your child has (or has had) lymphoma, you probably want to know if there are things you can do that might lower the risk of the lymphoma growing or coming back, such as having them eat a certain type of diet or take nutritional supplements. Unfortunately, it’s not yet clear if there are things you can do that will help.
As your child gets older, adopting healthy behaviors such as not smoking, eating well, getting regular physical activity, and staying at a healthy weight might help, but no one knows for sure. However, we do know that these types of behaviors can have positive effects on your child’s health that can extend beyond their risk of lymphoma or other cancers.
About dietary supplements
So far, no dietary supplements (including vitamins, minerals, and herbal products) have been shown to clearly help lower the risk of lymphoma progressing or coming back. This doesn’t mean that no supplements can help, but it’s important to know that none have been proven to do so.
Dietary supplements are not regulated like medicines in the United States – they do not have to be proven effective (or even safe) before being sold, although there are limits on what they’re allowed to claim they can do. If you’re thinking about having your child take any type of nutritional supplement, talk to your child’s health care team. They can help you decide which ones can be used safely while avoiding those that might be harmful.
To learn more, see Dietary Supplements: What Is Safe?Some children and teens may have emotional or psychological issues that need to be addressed during and after treatment. Factors such as the child’s age when diagnosed and the extent of treatment play a role here.
Having some anxiety or other emotional reaction after treatment is normal, but feeling overly worried, depressed, or angry can affect many aspects of a young person’s growth. It can get in the way of relationships, school, work, and other aspects of life.
Parents and other family members, especially siblings, can also be affected, both emotionally and in other ways. Some common family concerns during treatment include financial stresses, traveling to and staying near the cancer center, the need for family members to take time off from work, the possible loss of a job, taking care of other siblings, and the need for home schooling. Social workers and other professionals at cancer centers can help families sort through these issues.
Centers that treat many children and teens with lymphoma might have programs to introduce new patients to others who have finished their treatment. This can give patients and their families an idea of what to expect during and after treatment, which is very important. Seeing another patient with lymphoma doing well after treatment is often helpful. Support groups also might be helpful.
Concerns after treatment is finished
During treatment, children and their families tend to focus on the daily aspects of getting through it and beating the lymphoma. But once treatment is finished, emotional concerns can arise. Some could last a long time. They can include things like:

Dealing with physical changes that can result from the treatment
Worrying about the lymphoma returning or new health problems developing
Feeling resentment for having had lymphoma or having to go through treatment when others do not
Having concerns about being treated differently or discriminated against (by friends, classmates, coworkers, employers, etc.)
Having concerns about dating, marrying, and having a family later

For teens, another possible issue is having to rely more on their parents at a time when they are normally becoming more independent.
No one chooses to have lymphoma, but for many childhood lymphoma survivors, the experience eventually can be positive, helping to establish strong self-values. Other survivors may have a harder time recovering, adjusting to life after cancer, and moving on.
Returning to school
Many experts recommend that school-aged children attend school as much as possible. This can help them maintain a daily routine and keep their friends informed about what is happening. But they might also have some problems functioning normally and with school work. These issues can often be overcome with support and encouragement. Doctors and other members of the health care team can often recommend special support programs and services to help children and teens after treatment.
Some cancer centers have a school re-entry program that can help in these situations. In this program, health educators visit the school and tell students about the diagnosis, treatment, and changes that the child with cancer may go through. They can also answer any questions from teachers and classmates.
You can learn more about some of these issues in When Your Child Has Cancer, When Your Child Is Going Through Cancer Treatment, and When Your Child’s Treatment Ends.Because of major advances in treatment, most children treated for non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) now live well into adulthood, so there are more concerns about their health as they get older.
Just as the treatment of childhood lymphoma requires a very specialized approach, so does follow-up and monitoring for late effects of treatment. Careful follow-up after treatment is very important, as some side effects might not show up until many years after treatment. The earlier any problems are recognized, the more likely it is they can be treated effectively.
Childhood lymphoma survivors are at risk, to some degree, for several possible late effects from their cancer treatment. This risk depends on a number of factors, such as the type of lymphoma, the type and doses of treatments, and the child's age when getting treatment. It’s important to discuss what these possible effects might be with your child’s medical team so you know what to watch for and report to the doctor.
Late effects of treatment might include:

Heart or lung problems after getting certain chemotherapy drugs or radiation therapy to the chest
Slowed or limited growth and development (especially after a stem cell transplant)
Bone damage or thinning of bones (osteoporosis)
Changes in sexual development and ability to have children (see below)
Learning difficulties and changes in intellectual function
Development of second cancers, such as leukemia, later in life. This are not common, but it can happen. 

Cancer treatment might affect sexual development and the ability to have children later in life. Talk with your child’s cancer care team about the risk of treatment affecting fertility, and ask if there are ways to preserve fertility. For more information, see Preserving Fertility in Children and Teens With Cancer.
There may be other complications from treatment, as well. Your child’s doctor should carefully go over any possible problems with you before your child starts treatment.
Along with physical side effects, survivors of childhood cancer may have emotional or psychological issues. They also may have some problems functioning normally and with school work. Support and encouragement can often help with these issues. Doctors and other members of the health care team can often recommend special support programs and services to help children after cancer treatment.
Long-term follow-up guidelines
It's very important to discuss possible long-term complications with your child’s health care team, and to make sure there is a plan in place to watch for these problems and treat them, if needed.
To help increase awareness of late effects and improve follow-up care for childhood cancer survivors throughout their lives, the Children’s Oncology Group (COG, the major group of doctors who treat childhood cancer in the US) has developed long-term follow-up guidelines for survivors of childhood cancers. These guidelines are used to help create a child's survivorship care plan. They can also can help you know what to watch for, what types of screening tests should be done, and how late effects may be treated.
To learn more, ask your child’s doctors about the COG survivor guidelines. You can also download them for free at the COG website: www.survivorshipguidelines.org. The guidelines are written for health care professionals but patient versions of some of the guidelines are available (as “Health Links”) on the site as well.
For more about some of the possible long-term effects of treatment, see Late Effects of Childhood Cancer Treatment.What is childhood non-Hodgkin lymphoma?
Cancer can start any place in the body. Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer that affects the body’s lymph system (also known as the lymphatic system). The lymph system is part of the immune system, which helps fight infections and some other diseases. It also helps fluids move through the body.
NHL starts in early forms of cells called lymphocytes, which are a type of white blood cell.
NHL can start any place in the body where lymph tissue is found, including the lymph nodes (small bean-shaped sacs that help filter germs) and tonsils, and inside bones and certain organs.