Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) starts in blood-forming cells in the bone marrow and invades the blood.
Cells in nearly any part of the body can become cancer and can spread to other areas of the body. To learn more about how cancers start and spread, see What Is Cancer?
Normal bone marrow
Bone marrow is found inside certain bones such as the skull, ribs, pelvis, and spine. It's made up of blood-forming cells, fat cells, and supporting tissues that help the blood-forming cells grow. A small fraction of the blood-forming cells are a special type of cell known as stem cells. Stem cells are needed to make new cells. When a stem cell divides, it makes 2 cells: one cell that stays a stem cell and another cell that can keep changing and dividing to make blood cells.
There are 3 types of blood cells: red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets.
Red blood cells pick up oxygen in the lungs and carry it to the rest of the body. These cells also bring carbon dioxide back to the lungs. Having too few red blood cells is called anemia. People with anemia can look pale and feel tired and weak. Severe anemia can cause shortness of breath.
White blood cells (also called leukocytes) are important in fighting infection.

Lymphocytes are immune cells in the bone marrow, the blood, and in lymph nodes. Some kinds of lymphocytes make the antibodies that help your body fight germs. Other kinds directly kill invading germs by making toxic substances that damage the cells.
Granulocytes are white blood cells that destroy bacteria. They contain granules that are made up of enzymes and other substances which can destroy germs that cause infections. In the bone marrow, granulocytes develop from young cells called myeloblasts. The most common type of granulocyte is the neutrophil; which is crucial in fighting bacteria. Other types of granulocytes are basophils, and eosinophils. When the number of neutrophils in the blood is low, it is called neutropenia. This can lead to severe infections.
Monocytes are related to the granulocyte family. They also help protect you against bacteria. The early cells in the bone marrow that turn into monocytes are called monoblasts. When monocytes leave your bloodstream and go into tissue, they become macrophages. Macrophages can destroy germs by surrounding and digesting them. They're also important in helping lymphocytes recognize germs and start making antibodies to fight them.

Platelets are thought of as a type of blood cell, but they're really small pieces of a cell. They start as a large cell in the bone marrow called the megakaryocyte. Pieces of this cell break off and enter your bloodstream as platelets, which you need for your blood to clot. Platelets plug up damaged areas of blood vessels caused by cuts or bruises. If you have a shortage of platelets (a condition called thrombocytopenia) you can bleed and bruise a lot.
Features of chronic myelomonocytic leukemia

People with CMML may have shortages of some blood cells, but a main problem is too many monocytes. (at least 1,000 per mm3). Often, the monocyte count is much higher, causing their total white blood cell count to become very high as well.
Usually there are some abnormal cells, called blasts, in the bone marrow. The amount of blasts in CMML is below 20%.
Many people with CMML have enlarged spleens (an organ that lies just below the left rib cage).
About 15% to 30% of people with CMML go on to develop acute myeloid leukemia.
The DNA inside the abnormal cells does not have certain changes in the genes called BCR/ABL (Philadelphia chromosome), or PDGFRA and PDGRFRB. For more information about these gene changes, see How Is Chronic Myelomonocytic Leukemia Diagnosed?

Since CMML has features of both a myelodysplastic syndrome and myeloproliferative neoplasm, experts created a new category for it: myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative neoplasm (myelo -- bone marrow, proliferative -- excessive growth, dysplastic -- abnormal looking). CMML is the most common disease in this group. Much less common diseases in this group are atypical chronic myeloid leukemia and juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia. All of these diseases produce a lot of abnormal blood cells.
Chronic myeloid leukemia is an example of a myeloproliferative neoplasm where there' is an over-production of white blood cells.Genetics
Research on the causes, diagnosis, and treatment of chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) is being done at many cancer research centers. Scientists are making progress in understanding which changes in a person's DNA and RNA can cause normal bone marrow cells to develop into leukemia cells.
Studies have found that changes in the structure or activity of certain genes in CMML cells may help predict patients’ outcomes and how likely they are to go on to develop acute leukemia. Research continues in this area, and someday, this information may help guide treatment decisions.
As more information from this research unfolds, it may be used in designing new drugs or developing gene therapy. This approach replaces the abnormal DNA of cancer cells with normal DNA to restore normal control of cell growth.
Chemotherapy
Studies are in progress to find the best combination of chemotherapy drugs while trying to limit side effects. New drugs are continually being developed and tested.
As researchers have learned more about what makes cancer cells different from normal cells, they've begun to develop drugs that target these differences. Studies are looking at targeted therapies to treat CMML. These therapies target things like specific cell signaling pathways to shut down cancer cell growth. Some of these drugs are already being used to treat other cancers.
Stem cell transplant
Scientists continue to refine this procedure so that it works better and causes fewer problems. They are also looking at which patients will benefit the most and how newer transplant methods might be used to treat CMML.Overall, the signs and symptoms of leukemia can affect men or women and do not differ by sex or gender. The most common sign of chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) is having too many monocytes ( seen on a blood test). 
                     Having too many monocytes also causes many of the symptoms of CMML. These monocytes can settle in the spleen or liver, enlarging these organs. An enlarged spleen (called splenomegaly) can cause pain in the upper left part of the belly (abdomen). It can also cause people to notice they feel full too fast when they eat. If the liver gets too big (called hepatomegaly), it causes discomfort in the upper right part of the abdomen.
Low numbers of other types of blood cells cause many of the signs and symptoms of CMML:

A shortage of red blood cells (anemia) can lead to feeling very tired, with shortness of breath and pale skin.
Not having enough normal white blood cells (leukopenia) can lead to frequent or severe infections.
A shortage of blood platelets (thrombocytopenia) can lead to easy bruising and bleeding. Some people notice frequent or severe nosebleeds or bleeding from their gums.

Other symptoms can include weight loss, fever, and loss of appetite. Of course, many of these problems are caused more often by something other than cancer. If you're having symptoms, you should see a doctor so a cause can be found.If signs and symptoms suggest you may have chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML), the doctors will look at cells from your blood and bone marrow to confirm this diagnosis.
Blood tests
The complete blood count (CBC) measures different cells in the blood, such as the red blood cells, the white blood cells, and the platelets. The CBC is often done with a differential count (or “diff”), which is a count of the different types of white blood cells in the blood sample. In a blood smear, some of the blood is put on a slide to see how the cells look under the microscope.
People with CMML have higher numbers of monocytes, (at least 1,000 per mm3). Sometimes they have low numbers of other white blood cells. They may have shortages of red blood cells and blood platelets, as well.
Some patients have a small number of monoblasts in the blood. Monoblasts are the early, immature cells that grow and divide to make mature monocytes. Normally, these cells are only found in the bone marrow. It's never normal to see blasts in the blood, and it's often a sign of a bone marrow problem.
Blood cells from CMML patients may also have certain changes in size, shape, or other features that can be seen under the microscope. Blood abnormalities may suggest CMML, but an exact diagnosis cannot be made without looking at and testing cells taken from the bone marrow.
Other blood tests may be done to check for other possible causes of low blood counts, such as low levels of vitamin B12 and folate. Tests may also be done to look for other causes of a high white blood cell count, such as an infection.
Bone marrow tests
Samples of your bone marrow are taken by bone marrow aspiration and biopsy for testing. The samples are usually taken from the back of the pelvic (hip) bone. These tests are used to diagnosis and classify the type of blood cancer you have. They may be repeated later to see if treatment is working or to see if the CMML is transforming into an acute leukemia.
For bone marrow aspiration, you lie flat on a table (either on your side or on your belly). After cleaning the skin over the hip, the surface of the bone is numbed with local anesthetic. A very thin needle is used to put in the numbing drug, which may cause a brief stinging or burning sensation. A long, hollow needle is then put into the bone and a syringe is used to suck out a small amount of liquid bone marrow (about 1 teaspoon). Even with the anesthetic, most patients still have some brief pain when the marrow is removed.
A bone marrow biopsy is usually done right after the aspiration. A small core of bone and marrow (about 1/16 inch in diameter and 1/2 inch long) is removed with a wider needle that's twisted as it's pushed into the hip bone. The biopsy may also cause some brief pain. Once the biopsy is done, pressure will be held to help prevent bleeding and bruising.
A pathologist (a doctor specializing in the diagnosis of diseases using laboratory tests) examines the bone marrow samples under a microscope. A hematologist (a doctor specializing in medical treatment of diseases of the blood and blood-forming tissues) or an oncologist (a doctor specializing in medical treatment of cancer) usually looks at the samples too.
Looking at the cells in the bone marrow
The doctors will look at the types and number of blood-forming cells in the bone marrow aspirate and biopsy. They will also check to see if the bone marrow shows signs of infections, cancer cells, or other disorders. They will examine the size and shape of the cells and determine whether the red cells contain iron particles or the other cells contain granules (microscopic collections of enzymes and other chemicals that help white blood cells to fight infections).
Measuring blasts
Tests will be done to measure the percentage of marrow cells that are blasts. This is very important. Blasts are very early (immature) cells that are made by bone marrow stem cells. Over time, blasts mature into normal blood cells. But in CMML, some of the blasts do not mature properly, so there may be too many blasts and not enough mature cells. For a diagnosis of CMML, there must be less than 20% blasts in the bone marrow. A patient who has more than 20% blasts in the bone marrow has acute leukemia.


Cytogenetic tests
This test looks at the chromosomes inside the cells. DNA in human cells is packed into chromosomes. Each cell should have 46 chromosomes (23 pairs). Chromosome changes or abnormalities are fairly common in CMML. Sometimes pieces of chromosomes or even whole chromosomes are missing. CMML cells may also have extra copies of all or part of some chromosomes. Chromosome translocations may also be seen. This is where parts of chromosomes trade places with each other.
Chromosome testing can also help the doctors be sure that the problem isn’t a different leukemia, called chronic myeloid leukemia or CML. The leukemia cells in CML often contain an abnormal chromosome caused by a certain translocation. This is called the Philadelphia chromosome or BCR/ABL fusion. If the Philadelphia chromosome is present, the diagnosis is CML, not CMML. CMML also does not have changes in certain genes, called PDGFRA and PDGFRB. If these changes are present the problem might be a different myeloproliferative disorder.
Cytogenetic testing can take several weeks because the bone marrow cells need time to grow in laboratory dishes before the chromosomes can be seen with a microscope. The results of cytogenetic testing are written in a way that describes which chromosome changes are present. For instance:

A minus sign (-) or the abbreviation "del" is used to mean a deletion. So, if a copy of chromosome 7 is missing, it can be written as -7 or del(7). Often, only a part of the chromosome is lost. There are 2 parts to a chromosome, called p and q. So the loss of the q part of chromosome 20 is called 20q- or del(20q).
A plus sign (+) is used when there is an extra copy of all or part of a chromosome. For example, +8 means that chromosome 8 has been duplicated and too many copies of it are in the cell.
The letter "t" is used to indicate a translocation, which is when a piece of one chromosome breaks off and becomes part of another chromosome.

Other tests
These are other bone marrow tests that help the doctor diagnose CMML and rule out other blood diseases:

Immunocytochemistry. This testing is helpful in distinguishing CMML from other types of leukemia and from other diseases.
Flow cytometry. This test isn't needed for all patients, but it can be very helpful in diagnosing leukemia and lymphoma.
Molecular genetic tests. These tests are not needed to diagnose CMML, but they may be used in some cases

These tests can be done on cells besides bone marrow cells, such as cells from the blood.Supportive therapy is treatment aimed at preventing or relieving symptoms. The main purpose of this type of treatment is to improve the comfort and quality of life for someone diagnosed with cancer no matter what stage the cancer or the goal of treatment might be. You might also hear supportive care referred to as palliative care, symptom management, or comfort care.
Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) can be hard to treat. For many people with CMML, the main goal is to prevent the problems caused by low blood cell counts. For instance, low red blood cell counts (anemia) can cause severe fatigue. Treating the anemia with blood transfusions and/or erythropoietin can help patients feel better and allow them to be more active.
Some people are concerned about a slight risk of infection (hepatitis or HIV) spread by blood transfusion. This possibility is very unlikely, and the benefits of the transfused cells greatly outweigh this risk.
People with CMML often need a lot of blood transfusions. This can cause excess iron to build up in the body. This extra iron can deposit in the liver and heart, affecting how well the organs work. This iron build up is usually seen only in people who receive many transfusions over a period of years. Drugs called chelating agents can be used to treat and prevent iron overload from transfusions. Chelating agents are substances that bind with iron so that the body can get rid of it. They can be given intravenously (IV) or as an injection (shot) under the skin.
CMML patients with bleeding problems caused by a shortage of platelets may benefit from platelet transfusions.
People with CMML tend to get infections very easily. They should be especially careful to avoid cuts and scrapes and care for any injury right away. They should tell their doctors about any fever, signs of pneumonia (cough, shortness of breath), urinary infection (burning when urinating), or other signs of infection right away. Doctors will treat any known or suspected infections with antibiotics. See Infections in People with Cancer for more details.Chemotherapy (chemo) is the use of drugs for treating a disease such as cancer. The drugs can be swallowed as pills, or a needle can be used to inject them into a vein or muscle. Chemo is considered systemic treatment because these drugs enter the bloodstream and reach most areas of the body. This type of treatment is useful for diseases like chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) that are not only in one part of the body. Chemo cannot cure CMML, but it can help kill the abnormal bone marrow cells and allow normal ones to grow back.
Hydroxyurea
Hydroxyurea (hydroxycarbamate, Hydrea) is a chemo drug that has helped some patients with CMML live longer. This drug comes as a capsule that's taken by mouth daily. It can bring the numbers of white blood cells and monocytes down to normal. It may also help shrink an enlarged spleen. Because the main effect of hydroxyurea is to lower blood counts, anyone taking this drug will need to have their blood counts checked regularly. Other side effects are usually mild and well tolerated. Some patients have stayed on this drug for years without problems.
Hypomethylating agents
These drugs affect the way some genes inside cells are controlled. They activate some genes that help cells mature. They also kill cells that are dividing rapidly. This helps the normal bone marrow cells grow again, often leading to improved blood counts and the need for fewer transfusions.
Examples of this type of drug include:

Azacitidine (Vidaza
Decitabine (Dacogen) 

Azacitidine is given as a shot under the skin or into your blood (IV), often for 7 days in a row, once a month.
Decitabine is often injected into a vein (IV) over 3 hours every 8 hours for 3 days. This is repeated every 6 weeks. Decitabine can also be given by IV over an hour, each day for 5 days in a row, and repeated every 4 weeks.
A newer form of this drug, known as Inqovi, combines decitabine with cedazuridine, which helps stop the decitabine from being broken down in the digestive system. This allows the drug to be taken by mouth as a tablet, typically once a day for 5 days in a row, which is repeated every 4 weeks.
Side effects of hypomethylating agents are usually mild and rarely lead to stopping treatment. Still, these drugs can have some of the same side effects as regular chemotherapy, including:

Low blood cell counts (most often the white blood cells or platelets)
Fever
Nausea/vomiting
Diarrhea or constipation
Fatigue and weakness

Conventional chemotherapy
For a long time, CMML was grouped with myelodysplastic syndromes, and so it was treated with the same chemo drugs. Some of the chemo combos that have been used include:

Cytarabine (ara-C) with idarubicin
Cytarabine with topotecan
Cytarabine with fludarabine

Sometimes, topotecan is given by itself.
This type of treatment can help some patients, but it can cause severe side effects, including life-threatening infections or other problems. Using lower doses of chemo drugs is an approach that can help lower the chance of serious side effects. This treatment is generally only used in young and otherwise healthy people with CMML. Most patients with CMML are older and have other health problems. They are less likely to benefit from this intense type of chemo. Still, this may be an option for some people with advanced CMML.
Chemo drugs can cause many side effects. The side effects depend on the type and dose of the drugs that are given and the how long they are taken. Common side effects include:

Hair loss
Mouth sores
Loss of appetite
Nausea and vomiting
Low blood counts

Chemo often slows blood cell production. In CMML, this problem is usually made worse before it gets better. It can lead to:

Less ability to fight infection (due to low white blood cell counts)
Easy bruising and bleeding (due to low platelet counts)
Fatigue (due to low red blood cell counts)

When platelet counts get very low, patients may need platelet transfusions to prevent or stop bleeding. Likewise, fatigue caused by low red blood cell counts can be treated with red blood cell transfusions.
Most side effects are short-term and will go away over time after treatment ends. Your health care team often can suggest ways to lessen side effects. For example, other drugs can be given along with the chemo to prevent or reduce nausea and vomiting.
Chemo drugs can also damage organs such as the kidneys, liver, testicles, ovaries, brain, heart, and lungs. With careful monitoring, such side effects are rare. If serious side effects do occur, the chemo treatments may have to be reduced or stopped, at least for a short time.
Carefully monitoring and adjusting drug doses are important because some of these side effects can be permanent.Hematopoietic growth factors are hormone-like substances that stimulate bone marrow to produce blood cells. These substances occur naturally in the body, but scientists have found a way to make them in large amounts. This lets patients get larger doses of these growth factors than their body would make. Growth factor drugs are usually given by subcutaneous (under the skin) injections (shots).
Shortages of blood cells cause many of the symptoms in people with chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML), and growth factors can help keep blood counts at more normal levels.
Erythropoietin (Epo® or Procrit®) is a growth factor that promotes red blood cell production. It can help some patients avoid getting a lot of red blood cell transfusions. Sometimes erythropoietin is given along with a growth factor for white blood cells (G-CSF, Neupogen®, or filgrastim) to improve the patient’s response to the erythropoietin. Darbepoetin (Aranesp®) is a long-acting form of erythropoietin. It works in the same way but can be given less often.
A drug called oprelvekin (Neumega®, interleukin-11, or IL-11) can be used to stimulate platelet production. This drug can help increase the platelet counts of some CMML patients for a time, but then the counts go down again. For most people with CMML, this drug is not very helpful.Radiation therapy is treatment with high-energy rays or particles to kill cancer cells. The most common form of radiation therapy is external beam radiation therapy. The x-rays are aimed at the cancer from a machine outside the patient’s body. The treatment is much like getting an x-ray, but the radiation is more intense. The procedure itself is painless. Before your treatments start, the radiation team will take careful measurements to determine the correct angles for aiming the radiation beams and the proper dose of radiation. Each treatment lasts only a few minutes, but the setup time -- getting you into place for treatment -- usually takes longer.
If someone who has chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) is having problems from a very enlarged spleen, radiation therapy may be used to shrink it. Shrinking the spleen can improve symptoms like abdominal (belly) pain and trouble eating, but there are some risks. Treating the spleen with radiation can affect the way it works. Since the spleen helps protect against infections, this can increase the risk of severe infections. If you are considering treatment with radiation for an enlarged spleen, you should talk about the risks and benefits with your doctor. You may also need to get certain vaccines before radiation starts.Stem cell transplant (SCT) is the only treatment that can cure chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML). In this treatment, the patient gets high-dose chemotherapy often along with radiation to the entire body to kill the cells in the bone marrow (including the abnormal bone marrow cells). Then the patient is given new, healthy blood-forming stem cells. The 2 main types of SCT are: allogeneic and autologous.
In an autologous stem cell transplant, after the bone marrow is destroyed, the patient gets back their own stem cells. This type of transplant is not a standard treatment for patients with CMML because their bone marrow has abnormal stem cells.
For an allogeneic stem cell transplant, the patient gets blood-forming stem cells from another person -- the donor. The best results are when the donor’s cells are closely matched to the patient’s cell type and the donor is closely related to the patient, such as a brother or sister. Less often, an unrelated donor is matched to the patient.
Allogeneic stem cell transplant can have serious, even fatal, side effects and so is rarely used in elderly patients. Because of these side effects, some doctors only use this treatment for people younger than a certain age.
A special type of allogeneic transplant, a non-myeloablative allogeneic stem cell transplant, may be an option for older patients. This type of transplant is sometimes called a mini-transplant or a mini-allo. In this type, the doses of chemo and/or radiation that are given are lower than those used for a standard allogeneic transplant. These doses are not high enough to kill all the bone marrow cells, but they kill just enough to allow the donor cells to take hold and grow in the bone marrow. The lower doses of chemo and/or radiation cause fewer side effects, which makes this type of transplant easier for older patients to tolerate. Still, it has some serious side effects.
For now, allogeneic SCT is the only treatment that can cure some patients with CMML, but not all patients who get a transplant are cured. And patients can die from complications of this treatment. Also, many people with CMML are not able to get this treatment.Stem cell transplant (SCT) is the only way to cure patients with chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML). It may be the treatment of choice for younger patients when a matched donor is available. Advances in SCT processes mean this treatment could also be an option for some older patients.
If SCT is not an option, CMML is not curable. In this case, the goal is to relieve symptoms while limiting complications and reducing side effects. Supportive care, such as transfusions, blood cell growth factors, and antibiotics to treat infections, is used to treat all patients with CMML so they can live as long as possible.
Many times no treatment is needed for CMML but if it is, either the drug azacytidine (Vidaza) or decitabine (Dacogen) is often the first choice. These drugs may make blood counts drop for a time after treatment is started. Then, if the drug is working, blood counts rise to levels above those seen before treatment was started.
A major benefit for patients receiving azacytidine or decitabine is less need for transfusions and an improved quality of life. If their disease responds, the patients often are less fatigued and are able to function more normally.
Treatment with hydroxyurea can help some patients who have high white blood cell counts. This drug can help lower monocyte counts and decrease the need for transfusions. It can also shrink the spleen to help the patient feel more comfortable.
Conventional chemotherapy using drug combinations used to treat acute myeloid leukemia can be an option for patients who are younger and otherwise healthy, but it's rarely used.Since chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML) is rarely cured, most patients never actually complete treatment. Patients may go through a series of treatments with rests in-between. Some people stop active treatment in favor of supportive care. Learning to live with cancer that does not go away can be difficult and very stressful. See Managing Cancer As A Chronic Illness for more about this.
Follow-up care
Even if you have stopped your treatment for CMML, it is still very important to go to all your follow-up appointments. During these visits, your doctors will ask about symptoms, physically examine you, and order blood tests. They will continue to watch for signs of infection and signs that you are moving on to active leukemia. They'll also watch for short-term and long-term side effects of treatment. This is the time for you to ask your health care team any questions and to discuss any concerns you might have.
Almost any cancer treatment can have side effects. Some might last for just a few weeks or months, but others can be permanent. Don’t hesitate to tell your cancer care team about any symptoms or side effects that bother you so they can help you manage them.
Ask your doctor for a survivorship care plan
Your survivorship care plan might include: 

A suggested schedule for follow-up exams and tests
A schedule for other tests you might need in the future, such as early detection (screening) tests for other types of cancer, or tests to look for long-term health effects from your cancer or its treatment
A list of possible late- or long-term side effects from your treatment, including what to watch for and when you should contact your doctor
Diet and physical activity suggestions
Reminders to keep your appointments with your primary care provider (PCP), who will monitor your general health care 

Keeping health insurance and copies of your medical records
Even after treatment, it’s very important to keep your health insurance. With a chronic disease like CMML, your treatment may never really be over. Tests and doctor visits cost a lot, and even though no one wants to think about their cancer coming back or having to continue treatment for a long time, this could happen.
At some point after your cancer treatment, you might find yourself seeing a new doctor who doesn’t know about your medical history. It’s important to keep copies of your medical records to give your new doctor the details of your diagnosis and treatment. Learn more in Keeping Copies of Important Medical Records.
Can I lower my risk of CMML progressing or coming back?
If you have (or have had) CMML, you probably want to know if there are things you can do that might lower your risk of the cancer growing or coming back, such as exercising, eating a certain type of diet, or taking nutritional supplements. Unfortunately, it’s not yet clear if there are things you can do that will help.
Adopting healthy behaviors such as not smoking, eating well, getting regular physical activity, and staying at a healthy weight might help, but no one knows for sure. However, we do know that these types of changes can have positive effects on your health that can extend beyond your risk of CMML or other cancers.
About dietary supplements
So far, no dietary supplements (including vitamins, minerals, and herbal products) have been shown to clearly help lower the risk of  cancer progressing or coming back. This doesn’t mean that no supplements will help, but it’s important to know that none have been proven to do so.
Dietary supplements are not regulated like medicines in the United States – they do not have to be proven effective (or even safe) before being sold, although there are limits on what they’re allowed to claim they can do. If you’re thinking about taking any type of nutritional supplement, talk to your health care team. They can help you decide which ones you can use safely while avoiding those that might be harmful.
If the cancer comes back
If the cancer does recur at some point, your treatment options will depend on what treatments you’ve had before, your overall health, and other factors.
For more general information, see Understanding Recurrence.
Getting emotional support
Some amount of feeling depressed, anxious, or worried is normal when cancer is a part of your life. Some people are affected emotionally more than others. But everyone can benefit from help and support from other people, whether friends and family, religious groups, support groups, professional counselors, or others. Learn more in Life After Cancer.What is leukemia?
Cancer can start any place in the body. Leukemia starts in the bone marrow, the soft inner part of certain bones where new blood cells are made. It starts when certain blood cells grow out of control and crowd out normal blood cells. This makes it hard for the body to work the way it should.
There are many types of leukemia. Some are rare. Most are named based on if they are fast growing (acute), or slower growing (chronic). They are also named by which type of bone marrow cell (myeloid or lymphocytic) the leukemia starts in.
What is chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML)?
Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia , or CMML for short, is a type of cancer that starts in cells in the bone marrow that are supposed to grow into different types of blood cells. (These cells are called monoblasts.) CMML is slow growing, but over time the leukemia cells can spill out into the blood and reach other parts of the body, such as the spleen.
Questions to ask the doctor

Why do you think I have leukemia?
Is there a chance I don’t have leukemia?
Would you please write down the kind of leukemia you think I might have?
What will happen next?

How will the doctor know I have CMML?
Many people with CMML don’t have any symptoms. It's found by blood tests done for some other health problem or during a check-up. Even when there are symptoms, they may be very general and unclear.
Some signs of CMML are caused by a large spleen. You may have belly pain or feel full too fast after eating. Other signs include feeling tired or weak, losing weight, fever, lots of infections, and easy bruising or bleeding. The doctor will ask you questions about your health and do a physical and exam.
If signs are pointing to CMML, more tests will be done. Here are some of the tests you may need:
Tests that may be done
Blood cell counts: This blood test is often the first test done. People with CMML have too many white blood cells called monocytes (mon-o-sites). They may have early (not mature) cells, called monoblasts, in their blood. (Monoblasts should only be in the bone marrow.) They often have low numbers of other types of blood cells. Even though these results may point to leukemia, most of the time you will need more blood tests or a test of the bone marrow to make sure.
Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy (ASP-er-AY-shun and BY-op-see): For these tests, a doctor uses thin, hollow needles to take out small amounts of bone marrow, usually from the hip bone. The area around the bone is numbed, and you may be given a drug to make you sleep during the test. The samples are sent to a lab to see if there are leukemia cells in the bone marrow. These tests may also be done after treatment to see if the treatment is working.
Gene tests: If you might have CMML, tests will be done on samples of your blood or bone marrow to look for certain gene changes in the cells.
Other blood tests: If you have CMML, other blood tests will be done to see how well your liver, kidneys, and other body parts are working.
Questions to ask the doctor

What tests will I need to have?
Who will do these tests?
Where will they be done?
Who can explain them to me?
How and when will I get the results?
Who will explain the results to me?
What do I need to do next?

How serious is my CMML?
Most types of cancer are staged based on how much the cancer has spread. This can help the doctor know how to treat the cancer and how likely it is that you'll get better. But CMML can't be staged by looking at the size of a tumor. It's split into 2 groups based on cell counts in the blood and bone marrow:

CMML-1: Blasts make up less than 5% of white cells in the blood and less than 10% of the cells in the bone marrow.
CMML-2: Blasts make up 5% to 20% of the white cells in the blood, or they make up 10% to 20% of the cells in the bone marrow.

Questions to ask the doctor

Are there other doctors I need to see?
How many people with CMML have you treated?
What group is my CMML in?
Would you explain to me what the group means in my case?
What will happen next?

What kind of treatment will I need?
The kind of treatment you will need depends on your blood counts, your age, your overall health, and whether a stem cell donor can be found.
In most cases, treatment is used to prevent or control the problems CMML causes. This may be treatments like blood transfusions and drugs called growth factors to help you feel good and have safe blood cell levels. This is called supportive care.
Stem cell transplant
A stem cell transplant (SCT) is the only way to cure CMML. It lets doctors use very high doses of chemo to kill the leukemia cells. The high doses of these drugs destroy the bone marrow, which keeps new blood cells from being made. Although the drugs destroy the bone marrow, stem cells given after the chemo can bring back the blood-making bone marrow stem cells. SCT is very hard on your body. There are different kinds of SCT, each of which can have bad side effects. Ask your doctor which type you will have and what to expect.
Chemo
Chemo is the short word for chemotherapy – the use of drugs to fight cancer. Most of the time chemo drugs are given into a vein or taken as pills. These drugs go into the blood and spread through the body. In CMML, chemo is may be used to control the number of CMML cells in the bone marrow so healthy cells can grow. Chemo is given in cycles or rounds. Each round of treatment is followed by a break. Treatment often lasts for many months.
Side effects of chemo
Chemo can have many side effects, like:

Hair loss
Mouth sores
Not feeling like eating
Diarrhea
Sick stomach and throwing up
More risk of infections
Black and blue marks and bleeding easily
Tiredness

These problems tend to get better when treatment ends. There are ways to treat most chemo side effects. Be sure to talk to your cancer care team so they can help.
Clinical trials
Clinical trials are research studies that test new drugs or other treatments in people. They compare standard treatments with others that may be better.
If you would like to learn more about clinical trials that might be right for you, start by asking your doctor if your clinic or hospital conducts clinical trials. See Clinical Trials to learn more.
Clinical trials are one way to get the newest cancer treatment. They are the best way for doctors to find better ways to treat cancer. If your doctor can find one that’s studying the kind of cancer you have, it’s up to you whether to take part. And if you do sign up for a clinical trial, you can always stop at any time.
What about other treatments I hear about?
When you have cancer you might hear about other ways to treat the cancer or treat your symptoms. These may not always be standard medical treatments. These treatments may be vitamins, herbs, special diets, and other things. You may wonder about these treatments. Some of these are known to help, but many have not been tested. Some have been shown not to help. A few have even been found to be harmful. Talk to your doctor about anything you’re thinking about using, whether it’s a vitamin, a diet, or anything else.
Questions to ask the doctor

Is transplant an option for me?
What treatment do you think is best for me?
What’s the goal of this treatment?
What side effects could I have from treatment?
What can I do about these side effects?
Is there a clinical trial that might be right for me?
What about special vitamins or diets that friends tell me about? How will I know if they are safe?
How soon do I need to start treatment?
What should I do to be ready for treatment?
Is there anything I can do to help the treatment work better?
How long do you think I’ll live?
What will we do if the treatment doesn’t work or if the leukemia gets worse?
What’s the next step?

What will happen after treatment?
If you have CMML, you will be treated to help keep your disease in check. But most treatments can't cure the disease, so you will need to see your doctor a lot. Be sure to go to all of these visits. Your doctors will ask about symptoms, do physical exams, blood tests and maybe other tests to see how well your treatment is working.
Having CMML and dealing with treatment can be hard, but it can also be a time to look at your life in new ways. You may be thinking about how to be more healthy. Call us at 1-800-227-2345 or talk to your doctor to find out what you can do to feel better.
You can’t change the fact that you have CMML. What you can change is how you live the rest of your life – making healthy choices and feeling as good as you can.