Colorectal cancer starts in the colon or the rectum. These cancers can also be called colon cancer or rectal cancer, depending on where they start. Colon cancer and rectal cancer are often grouped together because they have many features in common.Excluding skin cancers, colorectal cancer is the third most common cancer diagnosed in both men and women in the United States.Research in colorectal cancer continues to be very active. Scientists are looking for causes and ways to prevent colorectal cancer, better ways to find it early (when it’s small and easier to treat), and ways to improve treatments. Here are some examples of current research.Researchers have found several risk factors that might increase a person’s chance of developing colorectal polyps or colorectal cancer.Researchers have found several factors that can increase a person’s risk of colorectal cancer, but it’s not yet clear exactly how all of these factors might cause this cancer.There’s no sure way to prevent colorectal cancer, but screening can find abnormal cells before they become cancer. You might also be able to lower your risk for colorectal cancer by changing the risk factors that you can control.If you have a family history of colorectal polyps or cancer, you have a higher risk of getting colorectal cancer yourself. The risk can be even higher in people with a strong family history of colorectal cancer.Screening is the process of looking for cancer or precancer in people who have no symptoms of the disease.The American Cancer Society has developed colorectal cancer screening guidelines for people at average risk as well people at high risk for colorectal cancer.Several tests can be used to screen for colorectal cancer (see American Cancer Society Guideline for Colorectal Cancer Screening). The most important thing is to get screened, no matter which test you choose.The American Cancer Society (ACS) believes that all people should have access to cancer screenings, without regard to health insurance coverage.Colorectal cancer might not cause symptoms right away, but if it does, it may cause one or more of these symptoms.If you have symptoms that might be from colorectal cancer, or if a screening test shows something abnormal, your doctor will recommend one or more of the exams and tests below to find the cause.After someone is diagnosed with colorectal cancer, doctors will try to figure out if it has spread, and if so, how far. This process is called staging. The stage of a cancer describes how much cancer is in the body. It helps determine how serious the cancer is and how best to treat it. Doctors also use a cancer's stage when talking about survival statistics.
The earliest stage of colorectal cancers is called stage 0 (a very early cancer), and then range from stages I (1) through IV (4). As a rule, the lower the number, the less the cancer has spread. A higher number, such as stage IV, means cancer has spread more. And within a stage, an earlier letter means a lower stage. Although each person’s cancer experience is unique, cancers with similar stages tend to have a similar outlook and are often treated in much the same way.
The staging system most often used for colorectal cancer is the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) TNM system, which is based on 3 key pieces of information:

The extent (size) of the tumor (T): How far has the cancer grown into the wall of the colon or rectum? These layers, from the inner to the outer, include: 
                      
The inner lining (mucosa), which is the layer in which nearly all colorectal cancers start. This includes a thin muscle layer (muscularis mucosa).
The fibrous tissue beneath this muscle layer (submucosa)
A thick muscle layer (muscularis propria)
The thin, outermost layers of connective tissue (subserosa and serosa) that cover most of the colon but not the rectumSurvival rates can give you an idea of what percentage of people with the same type and stage of cancer are still alive a certain amount of time (usually 5 years) after they were diagnosed. They can’t tell you how long you will live, but they may help give you a better understanding of how likely it is that your treatment will be successful.It’s important to have honest, open discussions with your cancer care team.Surgery is often the main treatment for early-stage colon cancers. The type of surgery used depends on the stage (extent) of the cancer, where it is in the colon, and the goal of the surgery.Surgery is usually the main treatment for rectal cancer. Radiation and chemotherapy are often given before or after surgery. The type of surgery used depends on the stage (extent) of the cancer, where it is, and the goal of the surgery.Ablation and embolization are sometimes used to treat colorectal cancer that has spread to other parts of the body, such as the liver or lungs.Radiation therapy is a treatment using high-energy rays (such as x-rays) or particles to destroy cancer cells. It is more often used to treat rectal cancer than colon cancer. For some colon and rectal cancers, treating with chemotherapy at the same time can make radiation therapy work better. Using these 2 treatments together is called chemoradiation.Chemotherapy (chemo) is treatment with anti-cancer drugs that may be injected into a vein or taken by mouth. These drugs travel through the bloodstream and reach most parts of the body. Chemo is often used to treat colorectal cancer.As researchers learn more about changes in cells that cause colon or rectal cancer, they have developed new types of drugs to specifically target these changes.Immunotherapy is the use of medicines to help a person’s own immune system better recognize and destroy cancer cells.Treatment for colon cancer is based largely on the stage (extent) of the cancer, but other factors can also be important.Treatment for rectal cancer is based mainly on the stage (extent) of the cancer, but other factors can also be important.For many people with colorectal cancer, treatment can remove or destroy the cancer. The end of treatment can be both stressful and exciting. You may be relieved to finish treatment but find it hard not to worry about cancer coming back. This is very common if you’ve had cancer.
For other people, colorectal cancer may never go away completely. Some people may get regular treatment with chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or other treatments to try to control the cancer for as long as possible. Learning to live with cancer that does not go away can be difficult and very stressful.Cancer survivors can be affected by a number of health problems, but often a major concern is facing cancer again. Cancer that comes back after treatment is called a recurrence. But some cancer survivors develop a new, unrelated cancer later. This is called a second cancer.What is colon or rectal cancer?
Cancer that starts in the colon or rectum is often called colorectal cancer. It might also be called colon cancer or rectal cancer. It starts when cells in the colon or rectum grow out of control and crowd out normal cells.
Cancer cells can spread to other parts of the body. Cancer cells from the colon or rectum can sometimes travel to the liver and grow there. When cancer cells do this, it’s called metastasis. The cancer cells in the new place look just like the ones that started growing in the colon or rectum.
Cancer is always named for the place where it starts. So when colorectal cancer spreads to the liver (or any other place), it’s still called colorectal cancer. It’s not called liver cancer unless it starts from cells in the liver.