Laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers are considered head and neck cancers. There are many different head and neck cancers and they are named depending on where the cancer starts. Cancer starts when cells in the body begin to grow out of control. 

Cancers that start in the larynx (voice box) are called laryngeal cancers
Cancers that start in the hypopharynx (lower throat) are called hypopharyngeal cancers

Laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers start in the lower part of the throat. Both types of cancers are covered here because these 2 structures are close to each other.

Ask your doctor to write down the exact kind of cancer you have.
The information here focuses on laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers. 
The larynx
The larynx is your voice box. It contains the vocal cords, one of the organs that help you speak. It's found in the neck, above the opening of the trachea (windpipe). There, it helps keep food and fluids from entering your trachea. The larynx has 3 parts:

The supraglottis is just above the vocal cords. It contains the epiglottis, which is a flap of tissue that closes off the larynx when you swallow. This keeps food and fluids from going into your lungs.About one-third of larynx cancers start here.
The glottis contains the vocal cords. Most larynx cancers start here.
The subglottis is below the vocal cords. Only about 5% of larynx cancers start in this area.

Treatment of cancer that starts in the larynx is based on which part it started in.
Your larynx and vocal cords have several functions:

The larynx produces sound for speaking. The vocal cords move and come together to change the sound and pitch of your voice.
The larynx protects your airway when you swallow. The epiglottis and vocal cords close tightly when you swallow to keep food and fluids from entering your lungs.
The vocal cords open naturally when you breathe so that air can get in and out of your lungs.

The hypopharynx
The hypopharynx is the lower part of the throat (pharynx) that lies right behind your larynx. The hypopharynx is the entrance into the esophagus (the tube that connects your throat to your stomach). When you swallow foods and liquids, they pass through your throat to your stomach. The hypopharynx helps make sure that food goes around the larynx and into the esophagus and not into the larynx.
Ask your doctor to explain to you where your cancer is located. Use the 3D interactive model to see more.How common is laryngeal cancer?
The American Cancer Society’s most recent estimates for laryngeal cancer in the United States for 2024 are:

About 12,650 new cases of laryngeal cancer (10,030 in men and 2,620 in women)
About 3,880 people (3,120 men and 760 women) will die from laryngeal cancer

About 60% of laryngeal cancers start in the glottis (the area containing the vocal cords), while about 35% develop in the supraglottic area (above the vocal cords). The rest develop in either the subglottis (below the vocal cords) or overlap more than one area so that it is hard to tell where they started.
Most people diagnosed with laryngeal cancer are 55 or older; a very small number of people diagnosed are younger than 55. The average age of people diagnosed with laryngeal cancer is about 66.
Black men are more likely to develop laryngeal cancer than White men and are more likely to die from it. It is also much more common in men than women.
The rate of new cases of laryngeal cancer is falling by about 2% to 3% a year, most likely because fewer people are smoking.  Over the past 10 years, the death rate is also dropping about 2% to 3% each year. 
Lifetime chance of getting laryngeal cancer
Overall, the lifetime risk of developing laryngeal cancer is about 1 in 200 for men and 1 in 840 for women. A number of other factors (see Risk Factors for Laryngeal and Hypopharyngeal Cancer) can also affect your risk for developing laryngeal cancer.
How common is hypopharyngeal cancer?
Cancers of the hypopharynx are very rare. In the United States, only about 2,000 to 4,000 cancers will start in the hypopharynx.
Survival statistics for these cancers are discussed in Survival rates for laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers, by stage.
Visit the American Cancer Society’s Cancer Statistics Center for more key statistics.Research into the causes, prevention, and treatment of laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers is now being done at many medical centers, university hospitals, and other institutions around the world.
Gene changes in laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers
A lot of research is being done to learn how changes in certain genes cause cells in the larynx or hypopharynx to become cancer. As doctors learn more about these gene changes, it could help them better identify which cancers are going to be harder to treat or are more likely to come back after treatment.
Researchers hope this information might also lead to better tests for early detection and to new treatments.
Treatment
In the coming years, promising new forms of treatment may work better and cause fewer long-term treatment-related changes in how a person eats and speaks.
Surgery
Doctors continue to improve surgery techniques to limit the amount of normal tissue that's removed along with the tumor. This might help lessen side effects after treatment.
One surgery technique now being studied is transoral robotic surgery (TORS). In this approach, the surgeon operates by precisely moving robotic arms holding long surgical tools that are passed down the throat. TORS uses smaller incisions (cuts), so it might lessen the side effects and long-term changes from surgery. Doctors are looking at using TORS instead of more extensive open surgery for early-stage tumors.
Transoral videolaryngoscopic surgery or TOVS  is another surgical method that might prove helpful in removing small tumors and saving healthy tissue. In TOVS, the surgery is done using a scope that's put in through the mouth. The doctor looks into the scope to see inside and uses long, thin tools to take out the tumor.
Chemotherapy and chemoradiotherapy
New combinations of chemotherapy and immunotherapy drugs are being studied with different radiation techniques, schedules, and doses to find a better tolerated and/ more effective treatment approach than the standard chemoradiation. You may ask your doctor if there are any clinical trials that are appropriate for you. 
Targeted therapy
Targeted therapy drugs attack specific genes and proteins in or around cancer cells that help them grow. These drugs work differently from standard chemotherapy drugs because they target cancer cells and cause less damage to normal cells. They may work in some cases when chemo drugs don't, and they often have different side effects. Targeted therapies are used to treat many kinds of cancer. Studies are looking at whether they might help treat laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers, too.
EGFR inhibitors: Squamous cell cancers of the larynx and hypopharynx (and other head and neck cancers) often have abnormally high levels of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) protein. EGFR helps the cancer cells grow out of control. Drugs that block EGFR, such as cetuximab, can slow cancer cell growth. Cetuximab (Erbitux) is approved for use in some head and neck cancers, and several other EGFR inhibitors are now being studied. Cetuximab is also being studied in combination with other targeted drugs or with immunotherapy drugs. These drugs seem to work best when combined with other treatments, like radiation and chemotherapy.
Immunotherapy
Immunotherapy is the use of medicines that help a person’s own immune cells find and destroy cancer cells. It can be used to treat some people with laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer.
The immunotherapy drugs, pembrolizumab and nivolumab, can be used in people whose laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancers have spread or have come back after chemoradiation. Studies are now looking to see if these drugs alone or used along with chemotherapy might be used upfront with surgery or radiation to treat early-stage cancers.A risk factor is anything that increases your chance of getting a disease like cancer. Different cancers have different risk factors. Some risk factors, like smoking, can be changed. Others, like a person’s age or family history, can’t be changed.
But risk factors don’t tell us everything. Having a risk factor, or even several risk factors, doesn't mean that you will get the disease. And many people who get the disease have few or no known risk factors.
Laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers are often grouped with other cancers of the mouth and throat (commonly called head and neck cancers). These cancers often have many of the same risk factors listed below.
Tobacco and alcohol use
Tobacco use is the most important risk factor for head and neck cancers (including cancers of the larynx and hypopharynx). People who smoke have a much higher risk for these cancers than people who don't smoke. Most people with these cancers have a history of smoking or some other tobacco exposure. The more you smoke, the greater your risk. Smoke from cigarettes, pipes, and cigars all increase your risk of getting these cancers.
Some studies have also found that long-term exposure to secondhand smoke might increase the risk of these cancers, but more research is needed to confirm this.
Moderate or heavy alcohol use (more than 1 drink a day) also increases the risk of these cancers, although not as much as smoking.
People who use both tobacco and alcohol have the highest risk of all. Combining these 2 habits doesn’t just add both risks together, it actually multiplies them. People who smoke and drink are many times more likely to get head and neck cancer than people who don't have these habits.
If you are thinking about quitting smoking and need help, call the American Cancer Society at 1-800-227-2345. A tobacco cessation and counseling program can help increase your chances of quitting for good. More helpful information on quitting is also in Stay Away from Tobacco.
Human papillomavirus infection
Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a group of over 150 related viruses. They are called papillomaviruses because some of them cause a type of growth called a papilloma, also known as a wart.
Infection with certain types of HPV can also cause some forms of cancer, including cancers of the penis, cervix, vulva, vagina, anus, and throat. Other types of HPV cause benign (not cancer) warts in different parts of the body.
The rate of head and neck cancers related to HPV infection have been rising mainly for cancers of the throat (oropharynx). But HPV infection is a rare risk factor for cancers of the larynx and hypopharynx.
Excess body weight
Weighing too much for your height appears to increase the risk of cancers of the larynx and oropharynx.  Eating more plant-based foods, such as non-starchy vegetables and whole fruit, might help people lose weight as well as reduce their laryngeal and oropharyngeal cancer risk.
Poor nutrition
Poor nutrition might increase the risk of getting hypopharyngeal cancer. The exact reason for this is not clear. Heavy drinkers often have vitamin deficiencies because they don't eat enough, which may help explain the role of alcohol in increasing the risk for these cancers.
Plummer-Vinson syndrome: People with this syndrome typically have poor nutrition because of rings of thin tissue (also called webs) in their esophagus that make it hard to swallow. They commonly have anemia from low iron levels. Having this syndrome puts people at risk of esophageal and hypopharyngeal cancers.
Genetic syndromes
People with syndromes caused by inherited gene defects (mutations) have a very high risk of throat cancer, including cancer of the hypopharynx.
Fanconi anemia: People with this syndrome often have blood problems at an early age, which may lead to leukemia or myelodysplastic syndrome. They also have a very high risk of cancer of the mouth and throat, including laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers.
Dyskeratosis congenita: This genetic syndrome can cause aplastic anemia, skin rashes, and abnormal fingernails and toenails. People with this syndrome have a very high risk of developing head and neck cancers, especially of the mouth and throat, when they are young.
Workplace exposures
Long and intense exposures to wood dust, paint fumes, and certain chemicals used in the metalworking, petroleum, construction, and textile industries can increase the risk of laryngeal and some hypopharyngeal cancers.
Asbestos is a mineral fiber that was often used as an insulating material in many products in the past. Exposure to asbestos is an important risk factor for lung cancer and mesothelioma (cancer that starts in the lining of the chest or abdomen). Some studies have suggested a link between asbestos exposure and laryngeal cancer, but not all studies agree.
Sex
Cancers of the larynx and hypopharynx are about 5 times more common in men than women. This is likely because the main risk factors − smoking and heavy alcohol use − are more common in men. But in recent years, as these habits have become more common among women, their risks for these cancers have increased as well.
Age
Cancers of the larynx and hypopharynx usually develop over many years, so they are not common in young people. Over half of patients with these cancers are 65 or older when the cancers are first found.
Race
Cancers of the larynx and hypopharynx are more common among African Americans and non-Hispanic White people than among Asian Americans, Pacific Islanders, American Indians, and Alaska Natives.
Gastroesophageal reflux disease
When acid from the stomach backs up into the esophagus it's called gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). GERD can cause heartburn and increase the chance of cancer of the esophagus. GERD is also thought to raise a person’s risk of hypopharyngeal cancers, but more studies are being done on this.We don’t know what causes each case of laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer. But we do know many of the risk factors for these cancers (see Risk Factors for Laryngeal and Hypopharyngeal Cancers) and how some of them cause normal cells to become cancer.
The development of normal human cells mostly depends on the information contained in the cells’ DNA. DNA is the chemical in our cells that makes up our genes, which control how our cells work. We look like our parents because they are the source of our DNA. But DNA affects more than just how we look.
Some genes control when cells grow, divide, and die: 

Genes that help cells grow, divide, and stay alive are called proto-oncogenes
Genes that help keep cell growth under control or make cells die at the right time are called tumor suppressor genes

Cancers can be caused by DNA mutations (gene changes) that turn on proto-oncogenes or turn off tumor suppressor genes. This leads to cells growing out of control. Changes in many different genes are usually needed to cause laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancer.
For more about how gene changes can lead to cancer, see Genes and Cancer.
Tobacco and alcohol: Scientists believe that some risk factors, such as tobacco or heavy alcohol use, cause these cancers by damaging the DNA of the cells that line the inside of the larynx and hypopharynx.
Inherited and acquired gene mutations: Some people inherit DNA mutations (changes) from their parents that greatly increase their risk for developing certain cancers. But inherited gene mutations are not believed to cause very many cancers of the larynx or hypopharynx.
Gene changes related to these cancers usually happen during life, rather than being inherited. These acquired mutations often result from exposure to cancer-causing chemicals, like those found in tobacco smoke. An acquired change in the p16  tumor suppressor gene seems to be important in laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers, although not all these cancers have this change. Several different gene changes are probably needed for cancer to develop, and not all of these changes are understood at this time.
Inherited mutations of proto-oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes rarely cause these cancers, but some people seem to inherit a poor ability to detoxify (break down) certain types of cancer-causing chemicals. They are more sensitive to the cancer-causing effects of tobacco smoke, alcohol, and certain industrial chemicals.
Human papillomavirus (HPV): Some types of HPV are important causes of middle throat (oropharyngeal) cancers and are sometimes seen with laryngeal cancers. HPV has two proteins known as E6 and E7 which turn off some tumor suppressor genes, such as p53 and Rb. This may allow the cells lining the larynx to grow out of control and to develop changes in additional genes, which in some cases can lead to cancer.Not all laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers can be prevented, but the risk of developing these cancers can be greatly reduced by avoiding certain risk factors such as smoking and drinking alcohol.
Avoid tobacco and alcohol
Tobacco use is the most important cause of these cancers. Avoiding exposure to tobacco (by not smoking and avoiding secondhand smoke) lowers the risk of these cancers. Heavy alcohol use is a risk factor on its own. It also greatly increases the cancer-causing effect of tobacco smoke. So it's especially important to avoid alcohol as well as the combination of drinking and smoking.
Avoid workplace chemicals
For people who work with chemicals linked to these cancers, having plenty of workplace ventilation and using industrial respirators are important protective measures.
Watch your eating habits and weight
Poor nutrition, excess body weight, and vitamin deficiencies have been linked to laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers. Following a healthy eating pattern may help lower your risk of these cancers (and many others). The American Cancer Society recommends following a healthy eating pattern that includes plenty of fruit, vegetables, and whole grains, and that limits or avoids red and processed meats, sugary drinks, and highly processed foods. In general, eating a healthy diet is much better than adding vitamin supplements to an otherwise unhealthy diet. See the American Cancer Society Guidelines for Diet and Physical Activity for our full guidelines.
Get the HPV vaccine and avoid HPV infection
The risk of human papillomavirus (HPV) infection of the middle throat (oropharynx) is increased in those who have oral sex and multiple sex partners. People who smoke are more likely to get HPV infections, probably because the smoke damages their immune system or the cells that line the throat. These infections are common and rarely cause symptoms. While HPV infection is linked to some cases of cancer of the larynx, most people with HPV infections of the other parts of the throat do not go on to develop this cancer. And most cancers of the larynx and hypopharynx are not related to HPV infection.
Vaccines that reduce the risk of infection with certain types of HPV are available. At first, these vaccines were meant to lower the risk of cervical cancer, but they've also been shown to lower the risk of other cancers linked to HPV , such as cancers of the anus, penis,vulva, vagina, and mouth and throat cancers.
These vaccines are only effective if given before someone is infected with HPV, so it is recommended they be given at an early age, but certain adults can also get vaccinated. Learn more in HPV Vaccines.Screening is testing for cancer or pre-cancer in people who have no symptoms of the disease. Screening tests may find some types of cancer early, when treatment is most likely to be successful.
For now, there is no screening test to find laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers early. These cancers are often hard to find and diagnose without complex tests. Because these cancers are not common, and the tests need specialized doctors, neither the American Cancer Society nor any other group recommends routine screening for these cancers.
Sometimes though, laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers can be found early. They usually cause symptoms, such as voice changes, which are described in Signs and Symptoms of Laryngeal and Hypopharyngeal Cancers. Talk to your doctor if you have any of these symptoms. Many of the symptoms of laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers are often seen in less serious, benign (non-cancer) conditions, or in other cancers. It is important to see a doctor to find out what is causing your symptoms. The sooner the cause is found, the sooner it can be treated, if needed.In most cases, laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers are found because of the symptoms they cause.
Hoarseness or voice changes
Laryngeal cancers that form on the vocal cords (glottis) often cause hoarseness or a change in the voice. This might lead to them being found at a very early stage. If you have voice changes (like hoarseness) that do not improve within 2 weeks see your health care provider right away. Pain and trouble breathing or swallowing might be symptoms of more advanced laryngeal cancer. 
For cancers that don’t start on the vocal cords, hoarseness occurs only after these cancers reach a later stage or have spread to the vocal cords. These cancers are sometimes not found until they have spread to the lymph nodes and you notice a growing mass in your neck.
Other signs and symptoms
Cancers that start in the area of the larynx above the vocal cords (supraglottis), the area below the vocal cords (subglottis), or the hypopharynx do not usually cause voice changes, and are therefore more often found at later stages.
Signs and symptoms of these cancers may include:

A sore throat that does not go away
Pain when swallowing
Trouble swallowing
Ear pain
Trouble breathing
Weight loss
A lump or mass in the neck (because the cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes)

Many of these symptoms are more likely to be caused by conditions other than laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer. Still, if you have any of these symptoms, it is very important to have them checked by a doctor so that the cause can be found and treated, if needed.Laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers are usually found because of signs or symptoms a person is having. If cancer is suspected, tests will be needed to confirm the diagnosis.
Medical history and physical exam
Your doctor will ask you about your symptoms, possible risk factors, your lifestyle and social habits, and other medical problems. A physical exam can help find signs of possible cancer or other diseases. Your doctor will pay very close attention to your head and neck, looking for abnormal areas in your mouth or throat, as well as any swollen lymph nodes in your neck.
Exams by a specialist
If your doctor suspects a cancer of the larynx or hypopharynx, you will be referred to an ear, nose, and throat (ENT) doctor, also called an otolaryngologist. This doctor will more completely examine your head and neck. This will include an inside look at the larynx and hypopharynx with an instrument, known as laryngoscopy, which can be done in 2 ways:
Indirect laryngoscopy
This is the simplest way to check your throat. The doctor uses a special small mirror and a light to look into your throat. The mirror is attached to a long handle, and it is placed against the roof of your mouth. The doctor shines the light into your mouth to see the image in the mirror. This exam can be done in 5 to 10 minutes in the doctor’s office. The doctor may spray numbing medicine to the back of your throat to help make the exam easier.
Direct flexible laryngoscopy
To do this, the doctor puts a fiber-optic laryngoscope (a thin, flexible, lighted tube) that goes up in your nose and down to your throat to look at your larynx and nearby areas. It usually takes about 10 minutes for the procedure which can also be done in the doctor's office. The doctor applies numbing medicine to your nose to help the exam. Sometimes, the doctor may use special tool to get a small sample (biopsy) from your throat for testing.
Direct rigid laryngoscopy 
This is a complete exam of your throat. This exam is usually done in an operating room where you are given drugs through an intravenous (IV) line to put you in a deep sleep (under general anesthesia). The doctor uses a rigid laryngoscope  to look for tumors in the larynx and hypopharynx. Other parts of the mouth, nose, and throat are examined as well. Your doctor will look at these areas through the scope(s) to find any tumors, see how large they are, and see how far they have spread to nearby areas. The doctor might also take out (biopsy) small tissue samples from any tumors or other changed areas using special tools during the procedure.
People with laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer also have a higher risk for other cancers in the head and neck area, so the nasopharynx (part of the throat behind the nose), mouth, tongue, and the neck are also carefully looked at and checked for any signs of cancer.
Panendoscopy
Panendoscopy is a procedure that combines laryngoscopy, esophagoscopy, and bronchoscopy. This lets the doctor thoroughly examine the entire area around the larynx and hypopharynx, including the esophagus (swallowing tube) and trachea (windpipe). This exam is usually done in an operating room where you are given drugs through an intravenous (IV) line to put you in a deep sleep (under general anesthesia).
The doctor uses direct rigid laryngoscopy to look for tumors in the larynx and hypopharynx. The doctor may also use an endoscope to look into the esophagus or a bronchoscope to look into the trachea (windpipe). The doctor might also take out (biopsy) small tissue samples from any tumors or other changed areas using special tools during the procedure.
Types of biopsies
In a biopsy, the doctor removes a sample of tissue which is looked at closely in the lab. It's the only way to be sure that cancer is present. There are many different types of biopsies. See Testing Biopsy and Cytology Specimens for Cancer to learn more.
Endoscopic biopsy
The larynx and hypopharynx are deep inside the neck, so taking out samples for a biopsy can be complicated. Biopsies of these areas are done in the operating room while you are under general anesthesia (a deep sleep). The surgeon uses special instruments through an endoscope to remove small pieces of tissue.
Fine needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy
This type of biopsy isn't used to remove samples in the larynx or hypopharynx, but it may be done to find the cause of an swollen lymph node in the neck. A thin, hollow needle is put through the skin into the mass (or lymph node) to get cells for a biopsy. The cells are then looked at closely in the lab. If the FNA shows cancer, the pathologist (the doctor examining the samples) can often tell what type of cancer it is. If the cancer cells look like they might have come from the larynx or hypopharynx, an endoscopic exam and biopsy of these areas will be needed.
If the FNA doesn't show cancer, it only means that cancer was not found in that lymph node. There could still be cancer in other places. If you're having symptoms that might be from a laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer, you could still need other tests to find the cause of the symptoms.
FNA biopsies might also be useful in some patients already known to have laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer. If the person has a lump in the neck, an FNA can show if the mass is from cancer spread. FNA might also be used in patients whose cancer has been treated by surgery and/or radiation therapy, to help find out if a neck mass in the treated area is scar tissue or if it's a return (recurrence) of the cancer.
Lab tests of biopsy samples
Biopsy samples (from endoscopy or surgery) are sent to the lab where they are looked at closely. If cancer is found, other lab tests may also be done on the biopsy samples to help better classify the cancer.
Tests for certain proteins on tumor cells: If the cancer has spread (metastasized) or come back, doctors will probably look for certain proteins on the cancer cells. For example, cancer cells might be tested for the PD-L1 protein, which, if found, might predict if the cancer is more likely to respond to treatment with certain immunotherapy drugs.
Imaging tests
Imaging tests use x-rays, magnetic fields, or radioactive substances to create pictures of the inside of your body. Imaging tests are not used to diagnose laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancers, but they're done for a number of reasons after a cancer diagnosis, such as:

To look at suspicious areas that might be cancer
To learn how far cancer may have spread
To help determine if treatment is working
To look for signs that the cancer has come back after treatment

Computed tomography (CT) scan
The CT scan (CAT scan) uses x-rays to make detailed cross-sectional images of your body. This test can help your doctor determine the size of the tumor, see if it's growing into nearby tissues, and find out if it has spread to lymph nodes in your neck. It might also be done to look for the spread of cancer to your lungs or other organs.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan
Like CT scans, MRI scans show detailed images of soft tissues in the body. But MRI scans use radio waves and strong magnets instead of x-rays. A contrast material called gadolinium may be injected into your vein before the scan to get clear pictures. 
An MRI scan can be done to look for spread of the cancer in the neck and other areas of the body, too.
Chest x-ray
A chest x-ray might be done to see if the cancer has spread to the lungs, but more often a CT scan of the lungs is done since it tends to give more detailed pictures.
Positron emission tomography (PET) scan
For a PET scan, a slightly radioactive form of sugar (known as fluorodeoxyglucose or FDG) is injected into the blood and collects mainly in cancer cells.
A PET scan may be used to look for possible areas of cancer spread, especially if the main cancer is more advanced. This test can also be used to help tell if a suspicious area seen on another imaging test is cancer or not.
PET/CT scan: Often a PET scan is combined with a CT scan using a special machine that can do both at the same time. This lets the doctor compare areas of higher radioactivity on the PET scan with a more detailed picture on the CT scan.
Bone scan
For a bone scan, a small amount of low-level radioactive material is injected into the blood and collects mainly in abnormal areas of bone. A bone scan can help show if a cancer has spread to the bones. But this test isn’t needed very often because PET scans can usually show if cancer has spread to the bones.
Barium swallow
This test might be done if someone is having a problem with swallowing. For this test, you drink a chalky liquid called barium to coat the walls of the throat and esophagus (swallowing tube). A series of x-rays of the throat and esophagus is taken as you swallow to help show problems.
Other pre-treatment tests
Other tests may be done as part of a workup in people diagnosed with laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer. These tests are not used to diagnose the cancer, but they may be done to see if a person is healthy enough for certain treatments, like surgery or chemotherapy.
Quit smoking: It is very important to quit smoking before any treatment for laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancer. If you used to smoke cigarettes before being diagnosed, it is important to not start during treatment. Smoking during treatment can cause a poor response to radiation treatment, poor wound healing, poor tolerance to chemotherapy, and a higher chance of dying. 
Blood tests: A complete blood count (CBC) measures the numbers of different types of blood cells. For example, it can show if you are anemic (have a low number of red blood cells), if you could have trouble with bleeding (due to a low number of blood platelets), or if you are at increased risk for infections (because of a low number of white blood cells). This test is often done regularly during treatment, because many cancer drugs can decrease the blood cells made by the bone marrow.
Blood chemistry tests can help determine how well your liver or kidneys are working.
Pre-surgery (before surgery): If surgery is planned, you might also get an electrocardiogram (EKG) to make sure your heart is working well. Some people having surgery also may need tests of their lung function known as pulmonary function tests (PFTs).
Dental exam: Your cancer care team will also have you see your dentist before any radiation is given since it can damage the saliva (spit) glands and cause dry mouth. This can increase the chance of cavities, infection, and breakdown of the jawbone.
Hearing test: The most commonly used chemotherapy drug used in treating laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancer, cisplatin, can affect your hearing. Side effects can range from ringing in the ears to hearing loss. Your care team will most likely have your hearing checked (with an audiogram) before starting treatment. Your doctor might also adjust your chemotherapy if your hearing is poor to start with.   
Nutrition and speech tests: Often, you will have a nutritionist who will evaluate your nutrition status before, during, and after your treatment to try and keep your body weight and protein stores as normal as possible. You might also visit with a speech therapist who will test your ability to swallow and speak. They might give you exercises to do during treatment to help strengthen the muscles in the head and neck area so you can eat and talk normally after finishing all of your cancer treatment.After someone is diagnosed with laryngeal cancer, doctors will try to figure out if it has spread, and if so, how far. This process is called staging. The stage of a cancer describes how much cancer is in the body. It helps determine how serious the cancer is and how best to treat it. Doctors also use a cancer's stage when talking about survival statistics.
The earliest stage of laryngeal cancer is stage 0, also known as carcinoma in situ (CIS). The other main stages range from I (1) through IV (4). Some stages are split further, using capital letters (A, B, etc.).  As a rule, the lower the number, the less the cancer has spread. A higher number, such as stage IV, means cancer has spread more. And within a stage, an earlier letter means a lower stage. Although each person’s cancer experience is unique, cancers with similar stages tend to have a similar outlook and are often treated in much the same way.
How is the stage determined?
The staging system most often used for laryngeal cancer is the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) TNM system, which is based on 3 key pieces of information:

The extent of the main tumor (T): Where is the tumor? How far has it grown into the larynx and nearby structures? Has it affected vocal cord movement?
The spread to nearby lymph nodes (N): Has the cancer spread to nearby lymph nodes in the neck? If so, how many are affected, are they on the same side (left or right) as where the cancer started, and how large are they?
The spread (metastasis) to distant sites (M): Has the cancer spread to distant parts of the body, such as ? (The most common sites of spread are the lungs, liver, or bones.)

Numbers or letters after T, N, and M provide more details about each of these factors. Higher numbers mean the cancer is more advanced. Once the T, N, and M categories of the cancer have been determined, this information is combined in a process called stage grouping to assign an overall stage. For more information, see Cancer Staging.
The system described below is the most recent AJCC system, effective January 2018. 
Laryngeal cancer is typically given a clinical stage based on the results of any exams, biopsies, and imaging tests that might have been done (as described in Tests for Laryngeal and Hypopharyngeal Cancers. If surgery has been done, the pathologic stage (also called the surgical stage) can be determined.
The stages of laryngeal cancer are slightly different, based on which part of the larynx the cancer starts in:

The supraglottis (the area above the vocal cords)
The glottis (the area that includes the vocal cords)
The subglottis (the area below the vocal cords)

The system described below is the most recent AJCC system, effective January 2018. 
Laryngeal cancer staging can be complex, so ask your doctor to explain it to you in a way you understand.
Explore the 3D, interactive color model of the larynx to see more.After someone is diagnosed with hypopharyngeal cancer, doctors will try to figure out if it has spread, and if so, how far. This process is called staging. The stage of a cancer describes how much cancer is in the body. It helps determine how serious the cancer is and how best to treat it. Doctors also use a cancer's stage when talking about survival statistics.
The earliest stage of hypopharyngeal cancer is stage 0, also known as carcinoma in situ (CIS). The other main stages range from I (1) through IV (4). Some stages also use capital letters (A, B, etc.).  As a rule, the lower the number, the less the cancer has spread. A higher number, such as stage IV, means cancer has spread more. Although each person’s cancer experience is unique, cancers with similar stages tend to have a similar outlook and are often treated in much the same way.
How is the stage determined?
The staging system most often used for hypopharyngeal cancer is the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) TNM system, which is based on 3 key pieces of information:

The size (extent) of the main tumor (T): How big is the tumor? How far has it grown into the hypopharynx and nearby structures? 
The spread to nearby lymph nodes (N): Has the cancer spread to nearby lymph nodes in the neck? If so, how many are affected, are they on the same side (left or right) where the cancer started, and how large are they?
The spread (metastasis) to distant sites (M): Has the cancer spread to distant parts of the body, such as ? (The most common sites of spread are the lungs, liver, or bones.)

Numbers or letters after T, N, and M provide more details about each of these factors. Higher numbers mean the cancer is more advanced. Once the T, N, and M categories of the cancer have been determined, this information is combined in a process called stage grouping to assign an overall stage. For more information, see Cancer Staging.
The system described below is the most recent AJCC system, effective January 2018. 
Hypopharyngeal cancer typically is given a clinical stage based on the results of any exams, biopsies, and imaging tests that might have been done (as described in Tests for Laryngeal and Hypopharyngeal Cancers). If surgery has been done, the pathologic stage (also called the surgical stage) can be determined.
The system described below is the most recent AJCC system, effective January 2018. 
Hypopharyngeal cancer staging can be complex, so ask your doctor to explain it to you in a way you understand.
Explore the 3D, interactive color model of the hypopharynx to see more.Survival rates can give you an idea of what percentage of people with the same type and stage of cancer are still alive a certain amount of time (usually 5 years) after they were diagnosed. They can’t tell you how long you will live, but they may help give you a better understanding of how likely it is that your treatment will be successful.
Keep in mind that survival rates are estimates and are often based on previous outcomes of large numbers of people who had a specific cancer, but they can’t predict what will happen in any particular person’s case. These statistics can be confusing and may lead you to have more questions. Your doctor is familiar with your situation; ask how these numbers may apply to you.  
What is a 5-year relative survival rate?
A relative survival rate compares people with the same type and stage of cancer to people in the overall population. For example, if the 5-year relative survival rate for a specific stage of laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer is 80%, it means that people who have that cancer are, on average, about 80% as likely as people who don’t have that cancer to live for at least 5 years after being diagnosed.
Where do these numbers come from?
The American Cancer Society relies on information from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database, maintained by the National Cancer Institute (NCI), to provide survival statistics for different types of cancer.
The SEER database tracks 5-year relative survival rates for laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancer in the United States, based on how far the cancer has spread. The SEER database, however, does not group cancers using AJCC TNM stages (stage 1, stage 2, stage 3, etc.) for laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer. Instead, it groups cancers into localized, regional, and distant stages:

Localized: There is no sign that the cancer has spread outside of the larynx/hypopharynx.
Regional: The cancer has spread outside the larynx/hypopharynx to nearby structures or lymph nodes.
Distant: The cancer has spread to distant parts of the body, such as the lungs.

5-year relative survival rates for laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers
These numbers are based on people diagnosed with cancers of the larynx or hypopharynx between 2012 and 2018. For laryngeal cancers, survival rates differ based on which part of the larynx the cancer started in (supraglottis, glottis, or subglottis).
Supraglottis (part of the larynx above the vocal cords)



SEER stage
5-year relative survival rate


Localized
61%


Regional
46%


Distant
30%


All SEER stages combined
45%



Glottis (part of the larynx including the vocal cords)



SEER stage
5-year relative survival rate


Localized
84%


Regional
52%


Distant
45%


All SEER stages combined
77%



Subglottis (part of the larynx below the vocal cords)



SEER stage
5-year relative survival rate


Localized
59%


Regional
38%*


Distant
44%*


All SEER stages combined
49%



*The 5-year relative survival for these cancers at the distant stage is better than for the regional stage. The reason for this is not clear, although it's important to know that these rates are based on small numbers of cases.
Hypopharynx



SEER stage
5-year relative survival rate


Localized
61%


Regional
39%


Distant
28%


All SEER stages combined
37%



Understanding the numbers

These numbers apply only to the stage of the cancer when it is first diagnosed. They do not apply later on if the cancer grows, spreads, or comes back after treatment.
These numbers don’t take everything into account. Survival rates are grouped based on how far the cancer has spread. But other factors, such as your age and overall health, and how well the cancer responds to treatment, can also affect your outlook.
People now being diagnosed with laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer may have a better outlook than these numbers show. Treatments improve over time, and these numbers are based on people who were diagnosed and treated at least 5 years earlier.It is important to have honest, open discussions with your cancer care team. They want to answer all of your questions, so that you can make informed treatment decisions. For instance, consider these questions:
When you’re told you have laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer

Where is my cancer located?
Has my cancer spread beyond where it started?
What is my cancer's stage (extent) , and what does that mean?
Will I need other tests before we can decide on treatment?
Will I need to see other doctors or health care professionals?
If I’m concerned about the costs and insurance coverage for my diagnosis and treatment, who can help me?

When deciding on a treatment plan

Do you have a lot of experience treating this type of cancer?
What are my treatment options?
If surgery is part of my treatment, will I need a laryngectomy? If so, what type? Will my voice be affected?
What do you recommend and why?
What is the goal of the treatment?
What are the chances that I can be cured of this cancer with these treatment options?
How quickly do I need to decide on treatment?
What should I do to be ready for treatment?
How long will treatment last? What will it be like? Where will it be done?
What risks or side effects are there to the treatments you suggest? Are there things I can do to reduce the side effects?
How will this treatment affect my voice? If my larynx is removed, what are the options for restoring my voice?
Should I get a second opinion? How do I do that? Can you recommend someone?
How will treatment affect my daily activities? Can I still work fulltime?
What would my options be if the treatment doesn’t work or if the cancer comes back (recurs) after treatment?
What if I have transportation problems getting to and from treatment?
Are you aware of any clinical trials I might be eligible for?

During treatment
Once treatment begins, you’ll need to know what to expect and what to look for. Not all of these questions may apply to you, but asking the ones that do may be helpful.

How will I know if the treatment is working?
Is there anything I can do to help manage side effects?
What symptoms or side effects should I tell you about right away?
How can I reach you on nights, holidays, or weekends?
Do I need to change what I eat during treatment?
Are there limits on what I can do or what I can eat?
Can I exercise during treatment? If so, what kind should I do, and how often?
Can you suggest a mental health professional I can see if I start to feel overwhelmed, depressed, or distressed?
What if I need social support during treatment because my family lives far away?

After treatment

Do I need a special diet after treatment?
Do I need to see a specialist to check my speech and swallow functions?
Are there any limits on what I can do?
What symptoms should I watch for?
What kind of exercise should I do now?
How often will I need to have follow-up exams and imaging tests?
When should my next endoscopy be done?
Will I need blood tests?
How will we know if the cancer has come back? What should I watch for?
What will my options be if the cancer comes back?
What type of follow-up will I need after treatment?

Along with these sample questions, be sure to write down some of your own. For instance, you might want more information about recovery times so that you can plan your work or activity schedule.
Keep in mind that doctors aren’t the only ones who can give you information. Other health care professionals, such as nurses and social workers, can answer some of your questions. To find out more about speaking with your health care team, see The Doctor-Patient Relationship.Studies have shown that people with head and neck cancer who are treated at centers that perform a lot of head and neck cancer surgeries, tend to live longer. And because of the complicated type of surgeries, along with the need for coordination between cancer specialists to make a complete treatment plan, it’s very important to have a surgeon and cancer center who has experience treating these cancers.
Quit smoking before laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancer surgery
If you smoke, you should quit. Smoking during cancer treatment is linked to poor wound healing, more side effects, and less benefit from treatment which can raise your risk of the cancer coming back (recurrence). Smoking after treatment can also increase the chance of getting another new cancer. Quitting smoking for good (before treatment starts, if possible) is the best way to improve your chances of survival.  It is never too late to quit. For help, see How To Quit Using Tobacco.
What kind of surgery is done to treat laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer?
Surgery is commonly used to treat laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers. Depending on the type, stage, location of the cancer, and other tissues involved, different operations might be used to remove the cancer and sometimes other tissues near the larynx or hypopharynx. In almost all surgeries, the plan is to take out all of the cancer along with a rim (margin) of healthy tissue around it.
Surgery might be the only treatment needed for some early-stage cancers. It also might be used along with other treatments, like chemotherapy or radiation, for later stage cancers.
After the cancer is removed, reconstructive surgery might be done to help make the changed areas look and work better.
Endoscopic surgery
For this surgery, an endoscope is passed down your throat to find the tumor. The endoscope is a long thin tube with a light and camera on the end of it. Using the camera, the doctor can see the tumor and pass long surgical instruments through the endoscope to find, biopsy, and treat some early-stage cancers of the larynx. For early-stage laryngeal cancer, studies have shown that endoscopic surgery can be as effective as radiation therapy.
Vocal cord stripping
If the cancer or pre-cancer is confined to the surface of the vocal cords, this type of surgery can strip away the cancer and the superficial layers of tissue on the vocal cords. Most people can speak normally again after this operation.
Laser surgery
Lasers can also be used through the endoscope. They can be used to excise (cut out) the tumor. This is sometimes called transoral laser microsurgery (TLM).
Laryngectomy
Laryngectomy is the removal of part or all of the larynx (voice box). It involves making an incision (cut) on the outside of the neck over the area of the Adam’s apple.
Partial laryngectomy: Smaller cancers of the larynx often can be treated by removing only part of the voice box. There are different types of partial laryngectomies, but they all have the same goal: to take out all of the cancer while leaving behind as much of the larynx as possible.
In a supraglottic laryngectomy, only the part of your larynx above the vocal cords is removed. This procedure can be used to treat some supraglottic cancers, and will allow you to speak normally afterward.
For small cancers of the vocal cords, the surgeon might be able to remove the cancer by taking out only one side of the larynx (one vocal cord) and leaving the other behind. This is called a hemilaryngectomy. Some ability to speak remains after this surgery.
Total laryngectomy: This procedure removes your entire larynx. The trachea (windpipe) is then brought up through the skin of the front of your neck as a stoma (or hole) that you breathe through (see the picture below). This is called a tracheostomy. If your entire larynx is removed, you will no longer be able to speak as you did, but you can learn other ways of speaking. (See  Living as a Laryngeal or Hypopharyngeal Cancer Survivor) The connection between the throat and the esophagus (swallowing tube) is usually not affected, so you can swallow food and liquids just as you did before the operation.Studies have shown that people who are treated at centers that treat a lot of head and neck cancers with radiation, tend to live longer. And because of the complicated types of surgeries, along with the need for coordination between cancer specialists to make a complete treatment plan, it’s very important to have a cancer center and radiation oncologist who has experience treating these cancers. 
Radiation therapy uses high-energy x-rays or particles to kill cancer cells. It can be used in many ways to treat laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers:

As the main (primary) treatment for some early-stage laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers. If the cancer is small, it can often be destroyed by radiation and surgery isn't needed. This can help to preserve better voice quality.
For people who are too sick to have surgery.
After surgery (adjuvant treatment), to try to kill any small areas of cancer (too small to be seen by the naked eye) that might be left behind and help lower the chance the cancer will come back.
For cancer that comes back after treatment (cancer recurrence).
To ease symptoms of advanced laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancer such as pain, bleeding, trouble swallowing, and problems caused when cancer spreads to the lungs or bones. (This is called palliative or supportive care.)

Many times, for advanced laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers, chemotherapy is given at the same time as the radiation. This combination, called chemoradiation, often works better than radiation alone, but it also has more side effects.
Radiation to this part of your body can cause problems to your teeth and gums, so it's important to see a dentist before starting treatment. A dentist can make sure your mouth is healthy before treatment. They might recommend that certain bad teeth be removed before you start radiation because this can increase your chance of infection during treatment. During and after treatment your dentist can help check for and treat any problems that may come up, such as infection or tooth and bone damage.
Quit smoking before laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancer treatment
If you smoke, you should quit. Your cancer might not shrink as well if you smoke during radiation treatment, you might have more side effects, and your benefit from radiation treatment might be less (which can raise your risk of the cancer coming back). Smoking after treatment can also increase the chance of getting another new cancer. Quitting smoking for good (before treatment starts, if possible) is the best way to improve your chances of survival. It is never too late to quit. For help, see How To Quit Using Tobacco.
Types of radiation therapy for laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancer
The types of radiation therapy that might be used to treat laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancer are:

External beam radiation therapy
Brachytherapy

External beam radiation therapy
The main type of radiation therapy used to treat laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancer is external beam radiation therapy. External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) focuses radiation from a source outside the body on the cancer.
Before your treatments start, the radiation team will use a CT scan to take careful measurements to determine the correct angles for aiming the radiation beams and the proper dose of radiation. A flexible, but sturdy, head and neck mask made from a plastic mesh might be made to hold your head, neck, and shoulders in the exact same position for each treatment. Some people might feel a bit confined while this mask is on and might need to ask for medicine to help them relax during the treatment. Sometimes, the mask can be adjusted so that it is not too constricting. Your radiation oncologist can discuss the options with you. 
Radiation therapy is much like getting an x-ray, but the radiation is much stronger. The procedure itself doesn't hurt. Each treatment lasts only a few minutes, but the setup time – getting you into place for treatment – usually takes longer.
Standard EBRT for laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancer is usually given in daily fractions (doses), 5 days a week, for about 7 weeks. Other schedules for radiation that might be used to treat laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer include:

Hyperfractionation radiation: a slightly lower radiation dose is given more than once a day (for example, radiation is given twice a day for 7 weeks)
Accelerated fractionation radiation: a standard dose of radiation is given each day over a shorter amount of time (5 to 6 weeks) instead of the usual 7 weeks (for example, radiation is given 6 days a week over 5 weeks instead of the standard 5 days a week for 7 weeks)
Hypofractionation radiation: a slightly higher radiation dose is given each day to lessen the number of treatments (for example, a higher radiation dose is given each day for 6 weeks, not the standard 7 weeks)

There are also more advanced EBRT techniques that help doctors focus the radiation more precisely:

Three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy (3D-CRT): 3D-CRT uses special computers to map the location of the tumor precisely. Several radiation beams are then shaped and aimed at the tumor from different directions, which makes it less likely to damage normal tissues.
Intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT): IMRT is a form of 3D-CRT. It uses a computer-driven machine that actually moves around the patient as it delivers radiation. Along with shaping the beams and aiming them at the tumor from several angles, the intensity (strength) of the beams can be adjusted to limit the dose reaching nearby normal tissues. This helps the doctor deliver a higher dose to the tumor.

Brachytherapy
Internal radiation therapy, also known as brachytherapy, puts radioactive material right into or near the cancer. It's rarely used to treat laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancer as first treatment, but might be used if the cancer recurs (comes back).
Side effects of radiation therapy for laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer
If you are going to get radiation therapy, it’s important to ask your doctor about the possible side effects, so you know what to expect.
Common side effects depend on where the radiation is aimed and can include:

Skin problems in the area being treated, ranging from redness to blistering and peeling
Mouth sores
Dry mouth
Worsening of hoarseness
Trouble swallowing
Change of taste
Possible breathing trouble from swelling
Tiredness
Hearing problems

Most of these side effects slowly go away when treatment is over. Side effects of radiation tend to be worse if chemotherapy is given at the same time. Tell your doctor about any side effects you have because there are often ways to help.
Mouth sores and problems swallowing
Many people treated with radiation to the neck and throat area have painful sores in the mouth and throat that can make it very hard to eat and drink. This can lead to weight loss and malnutrition. The sores heal with time after the radiation ends, but some people might continue to have problems swallowing long after treatment ends.
Ask your speech pathologist about swallowing exercises you can do to help keep those muscles working and increase your chance of eating normally after treatment.
Dry mouth
Radiation aimed at the head and neck might damage the salivary glands, leading to dry mouth that doesn't get better with time. This can cause discomfort and problems swallowing, and can also lead to tooth decay and damage to the jaw bone. People treated with radiation to the neck and throat must pay close attention to their oral health and see a dentist regularly.
Thyroid problems
Radiation might damage your thyroid gland. Your doctor will order regular blood tests to see how well your thyroid is working. You may need treatment if it's been damaged and not working well.
Lymphedema
Some people treated with radiation therapy might be at risk of developing lymphedema in the head and neck areas that were radiated. These areas can become swollen and firm. This can be worse if the person also had surgery. Sometimes, medicines, physical therapy, or massage therapy might be helpful.
Damage to the carotid artery
A person who has had radiation to the neck area might have an increased risk of stroke many years after treatment. This might be because of health problems that were already present before radiation such as narrowing of the artery or an increase in plaque both of which can decrease blood flow . People who smoke are also at risk. Because of this some doctors might schedule regular ultrasounds for you after treatment, to keep an eye on your arteries.Quit smoking before laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancer treatment
If you smoke, you should quit. Smoking during chemotherapy treatment can cause more side effects and can cause the chemo drugs to not work as well. It can give you a higher chance of getting an infection and is linked to worse outcomes. Smoking after treatment can also increase the risk of the cancer coming back and of getting another new cancer. Quitting smoking (before treatment starts, if possible) is the best way to improve your chances of survival. It is never too late to quit. For help, see How to Quit Using Tobacco. 
How is chemotherapy used to treat laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer?
Chemotherapy (chemo) is treatment with anti-cancer drugs that are injected into a vein or taken by mouth. These drugs enter the bloodstream and reach most parts of the body. Chemo may be used at different times during treatment for laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers:

As the primary (main) treatment: For more advanced cancers of the larynx, chemo is given along with radiation. This treatment, called chemoradiation, is commonly used for laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers. It can allow some patients to avoid having a laryngectomy which means they won't have trouble speaking after treatment. It can also be used as the main treatment for people who are too sick for surgery or don't want to have surgery. 
After surgery (adjuvant chemotherapy): Chemo along with radiation can be used after surgery to try to kill any cancer cells that might have been left behind but are too small to be seen on imaging tests. This can also lower the chance the cancer will come back,especially if cancer is found at the edges (margins) of the removed tumor, or if the cancer has other features that make it more likely to come back.
Before surgery (neoadjuvant or induction chemo): Chemo can be given alone (induction chemo) or with radiation (neoadjuvant chemoradiation) before surgery to help shrink a large tumor so it's easier to treat or to ease problems it might be causing. How much the tumor shrinks with induction chemo may help in deciding the next treatment. If there is no sign of cancer left, radiation alone may be best. If the tumor shrinks a lot but can still be seen on imaging tests, chemoradiation or radiation alone may be options. (These are covered in the chemoradiation section.) If there's little or no tumor response, surgery may be needed.
For locally advanced cancer: Chemo might be given to help relieve symptoms from cancers that are too big or have spread too far to be completely removed with surgery. This may be called supportive or palliative care.
For metastatic cancer (cancer that has spread to distant organs): Chemo might be given for cancer that has spread to areas outside the head and neck area such as the lungs or bones.

Chemoradiation
Chemoradiation is chemotherapy given at the same time as radiation. This combination has been shown to shrink laryngeal and hypopharyngeal tumors more than either treatment alone. Some call this organ preservation treatment because chemoradiation can be used instead of surgery so the structures in and near the larynx are "preserved" and not changed.
A common regimen is a dose of cisplatin every 3 weeks (for a total of 3 doses) during radiation. Sometimes, a smaller dose of cisplatin is given every week (for a total of 7 doses) along with radiation. For people who cannot tolerate chemo, the targeted drug cetuximab is often used with radiation instead.
How is chemotherapy given?
Chemo drugs for laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer that are given into a vein (IV), can be given either as an infusion over a certain period of time. This can be done in a doctor’s office, infusion center, or in a hospital setting.
Often, a slightly larger and sturdier IV has to be put in the vein system to give chemo. These are known as central venous catheters (CVCs) , central venous access devices (CVADs), or central lines. They are used to put medicines, blood products, nutrients, or fluids right into your blood. They can also be used to take blood for testing. There are many different kinds of CVCs. The most common types are the port and the PICC line.
Chemo is given in cycles, followed by a rest period to give you time to recover from the effects of the drugs. Cycles can be weekly or every 3 weeks long. The schedule varies depending on the drugs used. For example, with some drugs, the chemo is given only on the first day of the cycle. With others, it is given for a few days in a row, or once a week. Then, at the end of the cycle, the chemo schedule repeats to start the next cycle.
Adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemo can be given over weeks or months, depending on the drugs used. The length of treatment depends on how well it is working and what side effects you might have.
Chemotherapy drugs used to treat laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers
Chemo drugs work by attacking cells that are dividing quickly, this includes cancer cells. Some of the chemo drugs commonly used for cancers of the larynx and hypopharynx include:

Cisplatin
Carboplatin
5-fluorouracil (5-FU)
Docetaxel (Taxotere)
Paclitaxel (Taxol)
Methotrexate
Capecitabine (Xeloda), a pill that is changed into 5-FU once it gets to the tumor.

You might be treated with a single drug or 2 or more together. Commonly used chemotherapy drugs include cisplatin or carboplatin alone, or in combination with 5-FU, but other combinations are also available.
Possible side effects of chemo for laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers
Chemo drugs kill cells that are dividing quickly, which is why they work against cancer cells. But other cells, such as those in the lining of the mouth and intestines, and the hair follicles, are also dividing quickly. Chemo can affect these cells too, which can lead to side effects.
The side effects of chemo depend on the type and dose of drugs used, their dose, and how long you take them. Side effects tend to be worse when chemo is given along with radiation. Common side effects of chemo can include:

Nausea and vomiting
Loss of appetite or weight loss
Mouth sores
Diarrhea
Hair loss
Nail changes
Skin changes
Ringing in the ears

Chemo can also affect the blood-forming cells in the bone marrow, which can lead to:

An increased chance of infection (from low white blood cell counts)
Easy bleeding or bruising (from a low blood platelet counts)
Fatigue or shortness of breath (from low red blood cell counts)

Other side effects are specific to certain drugs. Ask your cancer care team about the possible side effects of the specific drugs you are getting. For example:
Neuropathy (nerve damage) is a common side effect of cisplatin, docetaxel, and paclitaxel, which can lead to numbness, tingling, or even pain in the hands and feet. The nerve damage caused by cisplatin can also cause hearing loss. This often improves once treatment is stopped, but it can last a long time in some people. If you might be treated with any of the drugs mentioned here, talk with your doctor about the side effects beforehand, and let them know right away if you start having numbness or tingling feelings or other side effects.
Hand-foot syndrome can happen during treatment with capecitabine or 5-FU (when given as an infusion). It can start out as redness in your hands and feet, and then might progress to pain and sensitivity your palms and soles. If it worsens, the skin may blister or peel, sometimes leading to painful sores. It’s important to tell your doctor right away about any early symptoms, such as redness or sensitivity, so that steps can be taken to keep things from getting worse.
Although most side effects get better once treatment is stopped, some can last a long time or even last forever. If your doctor is planning treatment with chemo, be sure to discuss the drugs that will be used and their possible side effects. Once chemo is started, let your health care team know if you have side effects, so they can be treated. There are ways to prevent or treat many of the side effects of chemo. For instance, there are many drugs that can help prevent or treat nausea and vomiting. In some cases, the doses of the chemo drugs may need to be lowered or treatment may need to be delayed or stopped to help keep the problem from getting worse.What is targeted drug therapy?
Targeted drug therapy is the use of medicines that target or are directed at proteins on cancer cells that help them grow, spread, and live longer. These drugs work to destroy cancer cells or slow their growth. Their side effects are different from chemotherapy (sometimes less severe) and many are taken as a pill. Targeted drug therapy can be used to treat laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers. 
Some targeted drugs, for example, monoclonal antibodies, work in more than one way to control cancer cells and may also be considered immunotherapy because they boost the immune system.
Drugs that target cancer cells with EGFR changes
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a protein that helps cancer cells grow. Drugs that target EGFR can be used to treat some advanced laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers.
Cetuximab for laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancers
Cetuximab (Erbitux) is a monoclonal antibody, which is a man-made version of an immune system protein that targets EGFR. Laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancer cells often have more than normal amounts of EGFR. By blocking EGFR, cetuximab can slow or stop cancer cell growth.
Cetuximab might be combined with radiation therapy for people with more advanced cancers, such as those that have spread locally but are not candidates for chemotherapy. Sometimes cetuximab might be combined with chemo drugs like cisplatin and 5FU in cases where the cancer has come back or has spread to distant parts of the body.
Cetuximab is given by infusion into a vein (IV), either once a week or every other week.
Possible side effects of drugs that target EGFR
The most common side effects of cetuximab are skin problems such as an acne-like rash on the face and chest during treatment, which can sometimes lead to infections. An antibiotic cream or ointment may be prescribed to help lessen the skin rash and related infections. Developing this rash might suggest the cancer is responding to treatment.
Other side effects can include headache, tiredness, fever, and diarrhea. A rare but serious side effect of cetuximab is an allergic reaction during the first infusion, which could cause problems with breathing and low blood pressure. You will be given medicine before treatment to help prevent this.
Talk to your doctor about the side effects you should watch for and what can be done to help prevent or treat them.Immunotherapy is the use of medicines that help a person’s own immune system find and destroy cancer cells more effectively.
Immune checkpoint inhibitors
An important part of your immune system is its ability to keep itself from attacking normal cells. To do this, it turns “checkpoints” or proteins on immune cells on (or off) to start an immune response. Cancer cells sometimes use these checkpoints to avoid being attacked by the immune system.
Drugs that target these checkpoints (called checkpoint inhibitors) can be used to treat some people with laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancer.
PD-1 inhibitors
Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) and nivolumab (Opdivo) target PD-1, a protein on T cells in the immune system. PD-1 normally helps keep T cells from attacking other cells. By blocking PD-1, these drugs boost the immune response against cancer cells. This can shrink some tumors or slow their growth.
In people with laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer that has returned after treatment or that has spread to other parts of the body, pembrolizumab can be used first, either alone or in combination with chemotherapy, unless the person is not a candidate for immunotherapy. Nivolumab and pembrolizumab can also be used by themselves if chemotherapy stops working.
These drugs are given as an intravenous (IV) infusion, typically every 3, 4, or 6 weeks.
Possible side effects of checkpoint inhibitors
Side effects of these drugs can include fatigue, cough, nausea, diarrhea, skin rash, loss of appetite, constipation, joint pain, and itching.
Other, more serious side effects occur less often:
Infusion reactions: Some people might have an infusion reaction while getting these drugs. This is like an allergic reaction, and can include fever, chills, flushing of the face, rash, itchy skin, feeling dizzy, wheezing, and trouble breathing. It’s important to tell your doctor or nurse right away if you have any of these symptoms while getting these drugs.
Autoimmune reactions: These drugs work by basically removing one of the safeguards on the body’s immune system. Sometimes the immune system starts attacking other normal parts of the body, which can cause serious or even life-threatening problems in the lungs, intestines, liver, hormone-making glands, kidneys, nerves, skin, or other organs.
It’s very important to report any new side effects during or after treatment with any of these drugs to your health care team promptly. If serious side effects do occur, you may need to stop treatment and take high doses of corticosteroids to suppress your immune system.Treatment of laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer is based largely on the stage (extent) of the cancer, but other factors are also important, such as your overall health and your personal preferences.
Talk to your doctor if you have any questions about the recommended treatment plan. Ask if the treatment will change how you look, talk, breathe, and eat.
Smoking during cancer treatment is linked to more side effects, worse outcomes, and reduced benefit of treatment. It is best to stop smoking completely before starting treatment. Smoking also increases the risk of the cancer coming back after treatment as well as the risk of getting a new cancer.  Quitting smoking for good is the best way to improve your survival. 
Laryngeal cancers
Stage 0
These cancers are almost always glottic (vocal cord) cancers that are found early because of voice changes. They are nearly always curable with either endoscopic surgery or radiation therapy. The patient is then watched closely to see if the cancer returns. If the cancer does comes back, radiation can be used.
At this stage, almost all cancers can be cured without major surgery. But, it's important for people to know that if they continue to smoke, this makes treatment less likely to work and increases the chance that another tumor will develop.
Stage I and II laryngeal cancers
Most stage I and II laryngeal cancers can be treated successfully without removing the whole larynx.
Either radiation alone or surgery with a partial laryngectomy can be used in most people. Many doctors use radiation therapy for smaller cancers. Voice problems tend to be less with radiation therapy than with partial laryngectomy, and there tend to be fewer problems with radiation treatment.
The treatment for glottic (vocal cord) cancers and supraglottic cancers (those starting above the vocal cords) is slightly different.
Glottic cancer: Some early glottic cancers might be treated by removing the vocal cord with cancer (cordectomy), or even by laser surgery. Radiation or surgery is usually enough to treat most glottic cancers unless there are signs that the treatment might not have cured the cancer (such as finding cancer cells at the edge of the removed tumor). If you need more treatment after surgery, your options might include radiation therapy, chemoradiation, or surgery to remove more of the larynx.
Supraglottic cancer: Supraglottic cancers are more likely to spread to the lymph nodes in the neck. If you're having surgery for supraglottic laryngectomy, the surgeon might also remove lymph nodes from your neck (called a lymph node dissection). If your treatment is radiation therapy alone, you will also get radiation to the lymph nodes in the neck. If, after surgery, the cancer is found to have features that make it more likely to come back, more treatment (such as radiation therapy, chemoradiation, or more extensive surgery) might be needed.
Stage III and IV laryngeal cancers
The main options for initial treatment for these cancers are surgery, chemotherapy followed by chemoradiation, or chemotherapy with radiation. Radiation therapy alone (or with the targeted drug cetuximab) may be an option for people who cannot tolerate more intensive treatments. Immunotherapy might be another option for some people with stage IV cancer.
Surgery for these tumors is almost always complete removal of the larynx (total laryngectomy), but a small number of these cancers might be treated by partial laryngectomy.
If they haven't spread already, these cancers have a high risk of spreading to nearby lymph nodes in the neck, so these lymph nodes are often removed along with the tumor if surgery is being done. Radiation therapy, often given with chemo, might be needed after surgery, especially if the cancer has spread to the lymph nodes or has other features that make it more likely to come back.
Instead of using surgery as the first step, many doctors now prefer to start treatment with chemoradiation (radiation and chemotherapy given together). If any cancer remains after treatment, surgery can then be done to try to remove it. Chemoradiation can be difficult to tolerate, but it often works as well as total laryngectomy and gives a chance to save the larynx. If the framework of the larynx (such as the thyroid cartilage) has been destroyed by the cancer, the larynx may never work normally again, no matter what treatment is chosen. In these cases, the best treatment may be surgery to remove the larynx and nearby tissues with cancer (such as the thyroid gland).
Another option may be to start with just chemotherapy, which is called induction chemotherapy. If the tumor shrinks, radiation therapy or chemoradiation is then given. If the tumor doesn’t shrink, surgery is usually the next treatment.
Cancers that are too big or have spread too far to be completely removed by surgery are often treated with radiation, usually combined with chemotherapy or cetuximab. Another option might be treatment with an immunotherapy drug, either alone or with chemotherapy. Sometimes, if the tumor shrinks enough, surgery of the tumor and the lymph nodes in the neck might be an option. But for many advanced cancers, the goal of treatment is often to stop or slow the growth of the cancer for as long as possible and to help relieve any symptoms it may be causing. Most experts agree that treatment in a clinical trial should be considered if you have advanced stage laryngeal cancer.
Hypopharyngeal cancers
These cancers are often harder to treat than laryngeal cancers. Because they don't cause symptoms when they're small, most are already at an advanced stage when they're diagnosed. Tumors in this area also tend to spread to the lymph nodes, even when there's no obvious mass in the neck. Because of this, treatment of the lymph nodes in the neck is often recommended.
Stage I hypopharyngeal cancers
The main options for initial treatment of these cancers are surgery with or without radiation to the lymph nodes.
Surgery includes removing all or part of the pharynx (throat) as well as lymph nodes on one or both sides of the neck (lymph node dissection). The larynx (voice box) often needs to be removed as well. People who have a high chance of the cancer returning (based on what's found during surgery) might then be treated with radiation or chemotherapy combined with radiation (chemoradiation).
Some patients with small tumors may get radiation as their main treatment. The cancer is assessed again after the treatment is complete and if there's any cancer left, surgery is done.
Stage II, III, and IV hypopharyngeal cancers
One option to treat these cancers is surgery to remove the pharynx, larynx, thyroid gland, and lymph nodes in the neck. This is usually followed by radiation alone or radiation with chemo, especially if there's a high chance that the cancer will come back based on what is found during surgery.
Another option is to first treat with both radiation and chemo (chemoradiation). If any cancer remains after treatment, surgery can try to remove it.
A third option is to get chemotherapy as the first treatment, called induction chemotherapy. This is usually followed by radiation therapy or chemoradiation, depending on how much the tumor shrinks. If the tumor does not shrink, surgery might be done. If the lymph nodes in the neck are still enlarged after treatment, surgery can be done to remove them (lymph node dissection).
Cancers that are too big or have spread too far to be completely removed by surgery are often treated with radiation, usually combined with chemo or cetuximab. Another option might be treatment with an immunotherapy drug, either alone or with chemotherapy. Sometimes, if the tumor shrinks enough, surgery to remove the tumor and the lymph nodes in the neck may be an option. But for many advanced cancers, the goal of treatment is often to stop or slow the growth of the cancer for as long as possible and to help relieve any symptoms it may be causing.
Most experts agree that treatment in a clinical trial should be considered if you have advanced stage hypopharyngeal cancers. 
Laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers that progress or recur after treatment 
If cancer continues to grow during treatment (progress) or comes back (recur), further treatment will depend on the location and extent of the cancer, what treatments have been used and when, and also on the person’s health and desire for more treatment. Recurrence can be local (in or near the same place it started) or distant (spread to other parts of the body, like the lungs or bone). It’s important to understand the goal of any further treatment – if it is to try to cure the cancer, to slow its growth, or to help relieve symptoms. It is also important to understand the benefits and risks of more treatment.
Because cancer recurrence is hard to treat, patients might want to think about taking part in clinical trials of newer treatments.
Local recurrence
Local recurrence in people who have already had limited surgery such as partial laryngectomy, can often be treated with more extensive surgery (such as a total laryngectomy). This may be followed by radiation therapy or chemoradiation (radiation and chemo are given at the same time).
Local recurrence might also be treated with immunotherapy alone or combined with chemotherapy. In some cases, chemotherapy might be given along with cetuximab. Or, chemoradiation may be used.
If cancer comes back locally after radiation therapy, the usual treatment is total laryngectomy, but more radiation therapy is sometimes used.
If surgery can't be done, immunotherapy alone or in combination with chemotherapy or chemoradiation can be used to help control the cancer and ease any problems it might be causing. (This is called palliative or supportive care.)
Distant recurrence
A distant recurrence, where radiation therapy and surgery are not options, can be treated with immunotherapy alone or immunotherapy combined with chemotherapy. Another option might be treatment with a targeted agent, either alone or with chemotherapy. Chemoradiation might also be used, if a person can physically tolerate it. 
If there are only a few tumors, surgery may be done. Radiation or chemo are also options.
Chemotherapy, immunotherapy or chemoradiation can be used to help control the cancer and ease any problems it might be causing. (This is called palliative or supportive care.)For many people with laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer, the end of treatment can be both stressful and exciting. You may be relieved to finish treatment, yet it’s hard not to worry about cancer coming back (recurring). This is very common if you’ve had cancer.
For others, the cancer might never go away completely. Some people may still may get regular treatments to try and control the cancer for as long as possible. Learning to live with cancer that does not go away can be difficult and very stressful. 
Ask your doctor for a survivorship care plan
Talk with your doctor about developing your survivorship care plan . This plan might include: 

A suggested schedule for follow-up exams and tests
A schedule for other tests you might need in the future, such as early detection (screening) tests for other types of cancer, or tests to look for long-term health effects from the cancer or its treatment
A list of possible late- or long-term side effects from your treatment, including what to watch for and when you should contact your doctor
Recommendations for things you could do to improve your health and even possibly lower the chance for your cancer coming back, such as nutrition and physical activity suggestions
Reminders to keep your appointments with your primary care provider (PCP), who will monitor your general health care, including your cancer screening tests. 

Follow-up care after laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer 
People with cancer of the larynx or hypopharynx are at risk of the cancer coming back and are at risk for developing new cancers in other parts of the body, so they must be watched closely after treatment. Your cancer care team will discuss which tests should be done and how often based on the type and stage of the cancer, as well as the type of treatment you had, and your response to that treatment.
When you have completed treatment, you will likely have follow-up visits with your doctor for many years. It's very important to go to all of your follow-up appointments. During these visits, your doctor will ask if you are having any problems and might order lab tests or imaging tests to look for signs of cancer returning, a new cancer, or treatment related side effects.
Almost any cancer treatment can have side effects. Some last for a few days or weeks, but others might last a long time. Some side effects might not even show up until years after you have finished treatment. Your doctor visits are a good time for you to ask questions and talk about any changes or problems you have noticed or concerns you have.
But don’t hesitate to report any new problems to your doctor right away. This might help your doctor find recurrent cancer as early as possible, when the cancer is small and easier to treat. 
Doctor visits and tests
If there are no signs of cancer remaining, many doctors will recommend you have a physical exam and some of the tests listed below every 3 to 6 months for the first couple of years after treatment, then every 6 months or so for the next few years. People who were treated for early-stage cancers may do this less often.
Laryngoscopy: Your head and neck will be examined (often including laryngoscopy) about:

Every 1 to 3 months during the first year
Every 2 to 6 months during the second year
Every 4 to 8 months during the 3rd to 5th years
Every year after the 5th year

Imaging: Chest x-rays and other imaging tests might be used to watch for recurrence or a new tumor, especially if you have new symptoms.
Blood tests: If you were treated with radiation, it might have affected your thyroid gland. You will most likely need regular blood tests to check your thyroid function.
Dental exams: People treated with radiation may also have problems with dry mouth and tooth decay, so regular dental exams are often recommended.
Speech, hearing, and swallowing rehabilitation: Both radiation and surgery can lead to problems with speech, swallowing, and hearing. These are often checked and treated by a speech therapist after treatment (see below). You might also need to see an audiologist (a specialist in hearing loss) for devices to improve your hearing if the treatment affected it.
Nutrition follow-up: Even after treatment, you might not gain weight or replace your protein stores as well as you should be. Sometimes, follow-up visits with the nutritionist are needed to help you with this.
Quitting smoking: If you had trouble quitting smoking before treatment, your doctor may recommend counseling as well as medication to help you. It is very important to quit smoking because even people with early-stage laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer are at risk of a new smoking-related cancer if they continue to smoke. See How to Quit Using Tobacco and call 1-800-227-2345 for more information about quitting smoking.
Managing long-term effects of treatment
Tracheostomy (stoma) care after total laryngectomy
Having a stoma (tracheostomy) means that the air you breathe will no longer pass through your nose or mouth, which normally help moisten, warm, and filter the air (removing dust and other particles). This means the air going into your lungs will be dryer and cooler. This may irritate the lining of your breathing tubes and cause thick or crusty mucus to build up.
It's important to learn how to take care of your stoma. You'll need to use a humidifier over the stoma as much as possible, especially right after the operation, until your airway lining has a chance to adjust to the drier air. You'll also need to learn how to suction out and clean your stoma to help keep your airway open.
Your doctors, nurses, and other health care professionals can teach you how to care for and protect your stoma. This will include precautions to keep water from getting into your windpipe while showering or bathing, as well as keeping small particles out of your windpipe.
Support groups formed by other people with tracheostomies can be good sources of information on stoma care and the use of products to protect and clean it.
Restoring speech after total laryngectomy
Total laryngectomy removes your larynx (voice box), and you won't be able to speak using your vocal cords. After a laryngectomy, your windpipe (trachea) is separated from your throat, so you can no longer send air from your lungs out through your mouth to speak. But there are ways you can learn to talk after total laryngectomy:

Tracheo-esophageal puncture (TEP): This is the most common way that surgeons try to restore speech. It can be done either during the surgery to treat the cancer or later. This procedure creates a connection between the windpipe and esophagus through a small hole at the stoma site. A small one-way valve put into this hole makes you able to force air from your lungs into your mouth. After this operation, you can cover your stoma with a finger to force air out of your mouth, producing sustained speech. (With some newer “hands-free” models you don't have to cover the stoma to speak.) It takes practice, but after surgery you can work closely with a speech therapist to learn how to do this.
Electrolarynx: If you cannot have a TEP for medical reasons, or while you are learning to use your TEP voice, you may use an electrical device to produce a mechanical voice. The battery-operated device is placed at the corner of your mouth or against the skin of your neck. When you press a button on the device, it makes a vibrating sound. By moving your mouth and tongue, you can form this sound into words. You'll need training with a speech therapist to learn to use it properly.
Esophageal speech: With training, some people learn to swallow air into the esophagus (the tube that connects your mouth to your stomach) and force it out through their mouth. As the air passes through the throat it will cause vibrations which, with training, can be turned into speech. This is the most basic form of speech rehabilitation. New devices and surgical techniques often make learning esophageal speech unnecessary.

Learning to speak again will take time and effort, and your voice will not sound the same. You will need to see a speech therapist who is trained in helping people who have had a laryngectomy. The speech therapist will play a major role in helping you to learn to speak.
Help for swallowing and nutrition problems
Cancers of the larynx or hypopharynx and their treatments can sometimes cause problems such as trouble swallowing, dry mouth, or even loss of teeth. This can make it hard to eat, which can lead to weight loss and weakness from poor nutrition.
Some people might need to adjust what they eat during and after treatment or might need nutritional supplements to help make sure they get the nutrition they need. Some may even need to have a feeding tube placed in the stomach.
A team of doctors and nutritionists can work with you to help you maintain your weight and get the nutrients you need. They can also talk to you about swallowing exercises that can help keep these muscles working and give you a better chance of eating normally after treatment.
Restoring your sense of smell
 Nearly everyone who has had a laryngectomy will find they cannot smell things the way they did before. This is because air no longer travels through your nose. If you have lost your sense of smell, or are smelling odors that aren't really there, olfactory rehabilitation might be another part of your recovery. Problems with smell (called olfactory disorders) can affect your appetite, sense of taste, food enjoyment, and how much you eat.
With olfactory rehabilitation, you can be taught techniques that cause nasal airflow and may help you recover your sense of smell. Examples are the nasal airflow-inducing maneuver (NAIM) and polite yawning. Olfactory rehabilitation (rehab) is available at some large medical centers. Talk to your health care team to learn more.
Sexual impact of laryngectomy
Laryngectomy, with the resulting stoma, can change the way you look as well as the way you talk and breathe. Sexual intimacy may be affected by these changes, but there are things you can do that can help during intimacy. Learn more details in Sex and the Man With Cancer and Sex and the Woman With Cancer.

Keeping health insurance and copies of your medical records
Even after treatment, it’s very important to keep health insurance. Tests and doctor visits cost a lot, and even though no one wants to think of their cancer coming back, this could happen.
At some point after your cancer treatment, you might find yourself seeing a new doctor who doesn’t know about your medical history. It’s important to keep copies of your medical records to be able to give your new doctor the details of your diagnosis and treatment.
Can I lower my risk of laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer progressing or coming back?
If you have (or have had) laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer, you probably want to know if there are things you can do that might lower your risk of the cancer growing or coming back, such as exercising, eating a certain type of diet, or taking nutritional supplements.
Quit smoking: Smoking during cancer treatment is known to reduce the benefit of treatment which raises your risk of the cancer coming back (recurrence). Smoking also increases the risk of getting a new smoking-related cancer (see Second Cancers below). Survivors of laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers who continue to smoke are more likely to die from their cancer. Quitting smoking for good (before treatment, if possible) is the best way to improve your survival. It is never too late to quit.
Adopting healthy behaviors such as eating well, getting regular physical activity, and staying at a healthy weight might help, but no one knows for sure. But we do know that these types of changes can have positive effects on your health more than just your risk of laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer or other cancers.
About dietary supplements
So far, no dietary supplements (including vitamins, minerals, and herbal products) have been shown to clearly help lower the risk of laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer progressing or coming back. This doesn’t mean that there aren't supplements that will help, but it’s important to know that none have been proven to do so.
Dietary supplements are not regulated like medicines in the United States. They do not have to be proven effective (or even safe) before being sold, although there are limits on what they’re allowed to claim they can do. If you’re thinking about taking any type of nutritional supplement, talk to your health care team. They can help you decide which ones you can use safely while avoiding those that might be harmful.
If cancer comes back
If cancer does recur (come back), treatment will depend on the location of the cancer, what treatments you’ve had before, and your overall health. To learn more about this, see Treatment of Laryngeal and Hypopharyngeal Cancers, by Stage. For more general information on dealing with cancer recurrence, see Understanding Recurrence.
Getting emotional support
Some amount of feeling depressed, anxious, or worried is normal when cancer is a part of your life. Some people are affected more than others. But everyone can benefit from help and support from other people, whether friends and family, religious groups, support groups, professional counselors, or others. Learn more in Life After Cancer.
Second cancers after treatment
Cancer survivors can be affected by a number of health problems, but often a major concern is facing cancer again. Cancer that comes back after treatment is called a recurrence. But some cancer survivors may develop a new, unrelated cancer later. This is called a second cancer. Laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer survivors are at higher risk for getting some types of second cancers. 
And being treated for laryngeal or hypopharyngeal cancer does not mean you can’t get another cancer.
Survivors of laryngeal cancer can get any second cancer, but they have an increased risk of:

Cancers of the mouth and throat (Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer)
Esophagus cancer
Colon cancer
Liver cancer
Lung cancer
Bladder cancer
Kidney cancer
Thyroid cancer

Many of these cancers are linked to smoking and alcohol use, which are also risk factors for laryngeal cancer.
Survivors of cancer of the hypopharynx can get any second cancer, but have an increased risk of:

Cancers of the mouth and throat (Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer)
Cancer of the nasal cavity
Cancer of the nasopharynx
Cancer of the larynx (voice box)
Esophagus cancer
Stomach cancer
Colon cancer
Rectal cancer
Pancreas cancer
Liver cancer
Lung cancer
Bladder cancer

Many of these cancers are also linked to smoking and alcohol use, which are also risk factors for hypopharyngeal cancer.
Survivors of laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers should follow the American Cancer Society guidelines for the early detection of cancer and stay away from tobacco products.
To help maintain good health, survivors should also:

Get to and stay at a healthy weight
Keep physically active and limit sitting or lying down time
Follow a healthy eating pattern that includes plenty of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains, and that limits or avoids red and processed meats, sugary drinks, and highly processed foods.
It's best not to drink alcohol. If you do drink, have no more than 1 drink per day for women or 2 per day for men

These steps may also lower the risk of some cancers.
See Second Cancers in Adults to learn more.What are laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers?
Laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers start in the head and neck area. Cancer that starts in the larynx (voice box) is called laryngeal cancer. Cancer that starts in the hypopharynx (the lower part of the throat right behind the voice box) is called hypopharyngeal cancer. These cancers start when cells in the larynx or hypopharynx grow out of control and crowd out normal cells.
Cancers that start in the head and neck area can have many different names depending on where it is. Ask your doctor to write down the exact kind of cancer you have because it can be confusing.
The information after the pictures below is about laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers.
Explore the 3D, interactive color model of the larynx and hypopharynx to learn more. Ask your doctor to use these pictures to show you where the cancer is.