Lung cancer is a type of cancer that starts in the lungs.Most lung cancer statistics include both small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In general, about 10% to 15% of all lung cancers are SCLC, and about 80% to 85% are NSCLC.Research into the prevention, early detection, and treatment of lung cancer is being done in many medical centers worldwide.A risk factor is anything that increases a person’s chance of getting a disease such as cancer.We don’t know what causes each case of lung cancer. But we do know many of the risk factors for these cancers (see Lung Cancer Risk Factors) and how some of them cause normal cells to become cancer cells.Not all lung cancers can be prevented, but you may be able to lower your risk for lung cancer by changing the risk factors that you can control.Screening is the use of tests or exams to find a disease in people who don’t have symptoms.A lung nodule is a small (≤ 3 cm) abnormal area that is sometimes found during a CT scan of the chest and/or abdomen.Most lung cancers do not cause any symptoms until they have spread, but some people with early lung cancer do have symptoms.Some lung cancers can be found by screening, but most lung cancers are found because they are causing problems. The actual diagnosis of lung cancer is made by looking at a sample of lung cells in the lab. If you have possible signs or symptoms of lung cancer, see your doctor.After someone is diagnosed with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), doctors will try to figure out if it has spread, and if so, how far. This is called staging or finding the cancer's stage.After someone is diagnosed with small cell lung cancer (SCLC), doctors will try to figure out if it has spread, and if so, how far. This process is called staging. The stage of a cancer describes where the cancer is in the body. It helps determine how best to treat it. Doctors also use a cancer’s stage when talking about survival statistics.Survival rates can give you an idea of what percentage of people with the same type and stage of cancer are still alive a certain amount of time (usually 5 years) after they were diagnosed.It’s important to have honest, open discussions with your cancer care team.Surgery to remove the cancer might be an option for early-stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). It provides the best chance to cure the disease. Still, lung cancer surgery is a complex operation that can have serious consequences, so it should be done by a thoracic surgeon who has a lot of experience operating on lung cancers.Many people with non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) are not healthy enough to undergo surgery. Some people might have a lung tumor in a place that makes surgery very difficult. Others might have advanced lung cancer and lung surgery may not be helpful. In these cases, ablative treatments (ablation) may be a treatment option. Ablative treatment is the use of temperature (hot and cold) to kill cancer cells and their surrounding tissue.Radiation therapy uses high-energy rays or particles to kill cancer cells.Chemotherapy (chemo) is treatment with anti-cancer drugs that may be injected into a vein or taken by mouth.As researchers have learned more about the changes in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells that help them grow, they have developed drugs to specifically target these changes.Immunotherapy is the use of medicines to help a person’s own immune system to recognize and destroy cancer cells more effectively.Palliative care (or supportive care) is meant to relieve symptoms and improve a person’s quality of life.The treatment options for non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) are based mainly on the stage (extent) of the cancer, but other factors, such as a person’s overall health and lung function, as well as certain traits of the cancer itself, are also important.Chemotherapy (chemo) is treatment with anticancer drugs that may be injected into a vein or taken by mouth. These drugs travel through the bloodstream and reach most parts of the body.Immunotherapy is the use of medicines to stimulate a person’s own immune system to recognize and destroy cancer cells more effectively.Radiation therapy uses high-energy rays (or particles) to kill cancer cells.Surgery is rarely used as part of the main treatment for small cell lung cancer (SCLC), as the cancer has usually already spread by the time it is found.
In fewer than 1 out of 20 people with SCLC, the cancer is found as only a single lung tumor, with no spread to lymph nodes or other organs. Surgery may be an option for these early-stage cancers, usually followed by additional treatment (chemotherapy and/or immunotherapy).Palliative care (sometimes called supportive care) is meant to relieve symptoms and improve a person’s quality of life.Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is usually staged as either limited or extensive. For treatment of limited-stage SCLC, a combination of chemotherapy and radiation is usually given. For treatment of extensive-stage SCLC, a combination of chemotherapy and immunotherapy is usually given.For some people with lung cancer, treatment may remove or destroy the cancer. Completing treatment can be both stressful and exciting. You may be relieved to finish treatment, but find it hard not to worry about cancer growing or coming back. This is very common if you’ve had cancer.
For other people, lung cancer may never go away completely. Some people may get regular treatments with chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or other therapies to try to control the cancer for as long as possible. Learning to live with cancer that does not go away can be difficult and very stressful.Cancer survivors can be affected by a number of health problems, but often a major concern is facing cancer again. Cancer that comes back after treatment is called a recurrence. But some cancer survivors develop a new, unrelated cancer later. This is called a second cancer.What is lung cancer?
Cancer can start any place in the body. Cancer that starts in the lung is called lung cancer. It starts when cells in the lung grow out of control and crowd out normal cells. This makes it hard for the body to work the way it should.
Cancer cells can spread to other parts of the body. For instance, cancer cells in the lung can travel to the bone and grow there. When cancer cells spread, it’s called metastasis.
Cancer is always named for the place where it starts. So when lung cancer spreads to the bone (or any other organ), it’s still called lung cancer. It’s not called bone cancer unless it starts from cells in the bone.What is lung cancer?
Cancer can start any place in the body. Cancer that starts in the lung is called lung cancer. It starts when cells in the lung grow out of control and crowd out normal cells. This makes it hard for the body to work the way it should.
Cancer cells can spread to other parts of the body. For instance, cancer cells in the lung can travel to the bone and grow there. When cancer cells spread, it’s called metastasis.
Cancer is always named for the place where it starts. So when lung cancer spreads to the bone (or any other place), it’s still called lung cancer. It’s not called bone cancer unless it starts in the bone.