Melanoma is a type of skin cancer that develops when melanocytes (the cells that give the skin its tan or brown color) start to grow out of control.
Melanoma is much less common than some other types of skin cancers. But melanoma is more dangerous because it’s much more likely to spread to other parts of the body if not found and treated early.Cancer of the skin is by far the most common of all cancers in the United States. Melanoma accounts for only about 1% of skin cancers but causes a large majority of skin cancer deaths.Research into the causes, prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of melanoma is being done in medical centers throughout the world.it’s important to know about the risk factors for melanoma because there may be things you can do to lower your risk of getting it. If you are at higher risk because of certain factors, there are also things you can do that might help find it early, when it’s likely to be easier to treat.While there are many known risk factors for melanoma, it’s not always exactly clear how they might cause cancer.
For example, while most moles never turn into a melanoma, some do. Researchers have found some gene changes inside mole cells that may cause them to become melanoma cells. But it’s still not known exactly why some moles become cancerous while most don’t.Gene mutations (changes) that increase melanoma risk can be passed down through families (inherited), but these account for only a small portion of melanomas.
You might have inherited a gene mutation that increases your risk of melanoma if:

Several (typically at least 3) members on one side of your family have had melanoma
You have had 3 or more melanomas
You have had melanoma at an early age (typically before age 45)
You or other family members have also had other cancers that might be from an inherited genetic syndrome (such as pancreatic cancer, breast cancer, or brain tumors)

The most common gene changes in families with high rates of melanoma are mutations in the CDKN2A gene (also known as p16). Genetic tests for changes in this gene have been available for several years, although it hasn’t always been clear how useful they are. In part, this is because people with any of the factors above are already known to have a higher risk of melanoma whether they carry a mutated CDKN2A gene or not, so it’s not always clear how genetic testing results would change what a person does (or what a doctor would recommend).
In recent years, researchers have found inherited changes in other genes that are linked with an increased risk of melanoma. While changes in some of these genes seem to be linked mainly with melanoma, changes in other genes result in inherited syndromes that increase the risk of other cancers, as well as melanoma. For example:

Changes in the BRCA2 gene are most often linked with increased risks of breast and ovarian cancers, but they’re also linked with some other cancers, including melanoma.
Changes in the PTEN gene are linked with breast, uterine, and thyroid cancer, as well as melanoma.
Changes in the TP53 gene can result in Li-Fraumeni syndrome, which is linked with increased risks of breast cancer, sarcoma, and brain tumors, as well as melanoma.
Changes in the BAP1 and MITF genes have also been linked with other cancers in addition to melanoma.

With advances in technology in recent years, the costs of genetic testing have come down, and testing can now be done to look for changes in several different genes at the same time. Still, most melanoma experts don’t recommend genetic testing for all people with a personal or family history of melanoma. Testing is more likely to be helpful if you have any of the factors in the list above, or if your family history includes some of the cancer types listed above.
Whether or not your doctor recommends genetic testing – and which gene changes would be tested for – will depend on how likely it is that you might have an inherited gene change.
If you’re considering genetic testing, it’s very important to meet first with a genetic counselor or other health professional with knowledge of genetic testing. They can describe the tests to you and explain what the results may or may not tell you about your risk. Genetic testing is not perfect, and sometimes the tests might not provide clear answers. To learn more about genetic testing, see Genetic Testing for Cancer Risk.
Regardless of whether genetic testing is done, people with a strong personal or family history of melanoma should talk to their doctor about getting regular skin exams, learning to do skin self-exams, and being particularly careful about sun safety.There is no sure way to prevent melanoma. Some risk factors, such as your age, natural skin color, and family history, can’t be controlled. But there are things you can do that could lower your risk of getting melanoma and other skin cancers.Melanoma can often be found early, when it is most likely to be cured. Some people have a higher risk of getting melanoma than others, but it’s important to know that anyone can get melanoma.Unusual moles, sores, lumps, blemishes, markings, or changes in the way an area of the skin looks or feels may be a sign of melanoma or another type of skin cancer, or a warning that it might occur.Most melanomas are brought to a doctor’s attention because of signs or symptoms a person is having.After someone is diagnosed with melanoma, doctors will try to figure out if it has spread, and if so, how far. This process is called staging. The stage of a cancer describes how much cancer is in the body. It helps determine how serious the cancer is and how best to treat it. Doctors also use a cancer’s stage when talking about survival statistics.
Although each person’s cancer experience is unique, cancers with similar stages tend to have a similar outlook and are often treated in much the same way.Survival rates can give you an idea of what percentage of people with the same type and stage of cancer are still alive a certain amount of time (usually 5 years) after they were diagnosed. They can’t tell you how long you will live, but they may help give you a better understanding of how likely it is that your treatment will be successful.If you have melanoma skin cancer, it’s important to have honest, open discussions with your cancer care team. Feel free to ask any question, no matter how small it might seem. Here are some questions you might want to ask.Surgery is the main treatment option for most melanomas, and it usually cures early-stage melanomas.Immunotherapy is the use of medicines to help a person’s own immune system recognize and destroy cancer cells more effectively. Several types of immunotherapy can be used to treat melanoma.Targeted drugs target parts of melanoma cells that make them different from normal cells. Targeted drugs work differently from standard chemotherapy drugs, which basically attack any quickly dividing cells.Chemotherapy (chemo) uses drugs that kill cancer cells. The drugs are usually given though an IV into a vein or taken by mouth as a pill. They travel through the bloodstream to all parts of the body and attack cancer cells that have already spread beyond the skin.Radiation therapy uses high-energy rays (such as x-rays) or particles to kill cancer cells. It is not often used to treat melanoma skin cancer.The type of treatment(s) your doctor recommends will depend mainly on the stage and location of the melanoma. But other factors can be important as well, such as the risk of the cancer returning after treatment, if the cancer cells have certain gene changes, and your overall health.For many people with melanoma, treatment can remove or destroy the cancer. Completing treatment can be both stressful and exciting. You may be relieved to finish treatment, but you might find it hard not to worry about cancer growing or coming back. (When cancer comes back after treatment, it is called recurrent cancer or a recurrence.) This is very common if you’ve had cancer.
For some people, the melanoma may never go away completely. These people may get regular treatments such as immunotherapy, targeted therapy, or chemotherapy to help keep the cancer under control for as long as possible and to help with any symptoms they’re having. Learning to live with cancer that does not go away can be difficult and very stressful. It has its own type of uncertainty.Melanoma is a kind of skin cancer that starts when skin cells called melanocytes grow out of control. Melanocytes normally make a brown pigment called melanin, which helps protect the body from the UV rays of the sun.
Melanomas can sometimes start in other parts of the body as well, such as in an eye or on the inside of the mouth, but this is much less common.
Melanoma cells can sometimes spread to other parts of the body if they’re not treated. This spread is called metastasis. Even if melanoma spreads to another organ, the cancer cells there are still melanoma cells.