Nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers are types of head and neck cancers. Head and neck cancers can have many different names depending on where the cancer starts. Cancer starts when cells in the body begin to grow out of control.

Nasal cavity cancers start in the opening behind the nose
Paranasal sinus cancers start in the air-filled spaces in the skull around or near the nose

Both types are covered here because these 2 structures are close to each other.
Since the head and neck area has so many organs in a small place, knowing what type of head and neck cancer you have can be confusing. Ask your doctor to write down the exact kind of cancer you have and show you where it is on a picture. To learn more about how cancer starts and spreads, see What Is Cancer?
The nasal cavity
The nose opens into the nasal cavity. This cavity is a space that runs along the top of the roof of the mouth (the palate, which separates your nose from your mouth) and then turns slightly downward to join the nasopharynx (the upper part of the throat).
The paranasal sinuses
Sinuses are small air-filled spaces in the bones that are connected to the nasal cavity. They are called paranasal because they are around the nose. The different sinuses are named depending on which bones they are in:

Maxillary sinuses are in the cheek area, below the eyes on either side of the nose.
Frontal sinuses are above the inner eye and eyebrow area.
Sphenoid sinuses sit deep behind the nose, between the eyes.
Ethmoid sinuses are above the nose, between the eyes.

The sinuses are normally filled with air. When you have a cold or sinus infection the sinuses can become blocked (obstructed) and filled with mucus and pus, which can be uncomfortable. This mucous can drain from your sinuses into your nasal cavity.
To see more details of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses, explore the 3D interactive color model .How common is nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancer?
Cancers of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses are rare, and make up about 3% to 5% of all head and neck cancers in the United States.
What is the most common type of nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer?
Most cancers in the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses are squamous cell cancers. 
Who gets cancer of the nasal cavity or paranasal sinus?
About 4 out of 5 cases occur in people who are 55 years old or older.
In the US, White people are much more likely to develop these cancers than Black people, and men are about twice more likely than women to get these cancers. These cancers occur much more often in certain areas of the world such as Denmark.
Where are nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers found?
Most cancers of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses occur in the maxillary sinuses or in the nasal cavity. They are less common in the ethmoid sinuses, and are rare in the frontal and sphenoid sinuses.
Survival statistics for these cancers are covered in the section Survival Rates for Nasal Cavity and Paranasal Sinus Cancers, by Stage.Research on prevention of and better treatment for nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers is now being done at many medical centers, university hospitals, and other institutions across the nation.
Genetics
Little is known about the gene changes in nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancer because this cancer is so rare. Still, scientists have found some changes in the genes of some head and neck cancer cells that may be related to the change of normal cells to cancer cells. But more research is needed to identify these changes clearly and link them to nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers.
Understanding these gene changes may help find better ways to diagnose these cancers. It may also lead to treatments that work better and have fewer side effects than those used today.
For example, a new type of cancer has been found in the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses called NUT carcinoma (cancer). NUT stands for the NUTM1 gene that is abnormal and causes this type of cancer that mostly grows in the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses. Studies are being done to see if certain targeted drugs might be used against this abnormal gene.
Treatment
Surgery
Surgeons are looking at new ways to remove these cancers while doing as little damage as possible to nearby normal tissues. Researchers are also looking for better ways to combine surgery with other cancer treatments to get better outcomes.
Studies are looking at ways to reconstruct, or rebuild the affected bony parts of the face, and how to best do it. Bone and tissue grafts, as well as man-made materials are being looked at.
Radiation therapy
Doctors are always looking for better ways to focus radiation on tumors more precisely to get more radiation to the tumor while limiting damage to nearby areas. This is especially important for head and neck tumors like nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers, where there are many important structures (like the eyes and brain), blood vessels, and nerves close to the tumor.
Intensity modulated radiation therapy or IMRT is the type of radiation most often used today to treat nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancers. Research is showing that proton therapy (which uses proton beams instead of x-rays) could work as well as IMRT. Proton therapy could allow doctors to give higher doses of radiation to the cancer with less damage to the tissues the rays pass through. This might also cause fewer side effects, like mouth pain, eating problems, and weight loss. Proton therapy or IMRT can be used to treat these cancers, but more studies are needed with proton therapy to evaluate long-term side effects. Also, proton therapy is not available everywhere. 
Different radiation schedules are also being studied. For instance, instead of giving one large dose of radiation each day, the cancer might be better controlled with the same dose of radiation given 6 days a week instead of 5, over a shorter period of time. This is called accelerated fractionation and needs to be studied more.
Improvements in radiation have also led doctors to test giving radiation in the same area for cancers that come back after the initial course of treatment.
Chemotherapy
Doctors are looking at how chemotherapy can be used with other treatments to improve outcomes, especially for bigger cancers that may have already spread. Induction chemotherapy -- chemo given before surgery and/or radiation -- is of special interest because studies suggest that it may help save the eyeball in people with advanced disease. It's also been linked to longer survival. Studies are also looking at whether giving chemotherapy regularly after surgery (adjuvant chemotherapy) is helpful in keeping the cancer from coming back (recurring). 
More research is needed to know when to use chemotherapy and which chemo drug combinations are the best for these cancers.
Targeted drug therapy
Clinical trials are studying several targeted therapies that block the action of the substances (such as growth factors and growth factor receptors) that cause head and neck cancers to grow and spread. Cetuximab is already used in some cases. Many studies are testing combinations of targeted therapies plus chemo or radiation. As has been the case with many other kinds of cancer, targeted therapies may prove to be a great advancement in treating nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers.
Immunotherapy
Immunotherapy has been studied more in other types of head and neck cancer, such as laryngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers. There is not much information on their use for nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancers since they are rare. More research is being done to better understand immunotherapy drugs in these specific cancers.
Because nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers are rare, nearly all clinical trials include patients with other types of head and neck cancer as well. Although these studies are not specific to nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers, doctors often apply the results when choosing treatment for patients with nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers. Contact the nearest cancer center to find out what clinical trials are being done in your community.A risk factor is anything that increases your chances of getting a disease like cancer. Different cancers have different risk factors. Some risk factors, like smoking, can be changed. Others, like a person’s age or family history, can’t be changed.
But risk factors don’t tell us everything. Having a risk factor, or even several, does not mean that you will get the disease. Many people with risk factors never develop these cancers, while people with these cancers may have few or no known risk factors.
Researchers have found a few risk factors that make a person more likely to develop nasal cavity (nose) and paranasal sinus cancer. Most of these are exposures to inhaled substances in the workplace.Other risk factors are similar to those for other cancers in the head and neck area, such as smoking.
Workplace exposures
People who work in certain jobs are more likely to develop nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers. The increased risk seems to be related to breathing in certain substances while at work, such as:

Wood dusts from carpentry (such as furniture and cabinet builders), sawmills, and other wood-related industries
Dusts from textiles (textile plants)
Leather dusts (shoemaking)
Flour (baking and flour milling)
Nickel and chromium dust
Mustard gas (a poison used in chemical warfare)
Radium (a radioactive element rarely used today)

These workplace exposures have less clear links to nasal and paranasal sinus cancer:

Glues
Formaldehyde
Organic solvents

Smoking
Smoking increases the risk of nasal cavity cancer, specifically the squamous cell type.
Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection
The human papillomavirus (HPV) is a group of over 200 related viruses. They are called papilloma viruses because some of them cause a type of benign (not cancer) growth called a papilloma, more commonly known as a wart.
But infection with certain high-risk  types of HPV can cause some forms of cancers, including cancers of the cervix, vagina, anus, vulva, penis, mouth, and throat. HPV has been found in some cancers of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses, but because these cancers are rare, more research is needed to show that HPV infection causes them.
Sex
Cancers of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses are about 2 times more common in men than women.
Age
About 80% (8 out of 10 people) of people diagnosed with cancer of the nasal cavity or paranasal sinus are older than 55 years of age.   
Race
Cancers of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses are much more common among White people than Black people.
Hereditary retinoblastoma treatment
People with the hereditary form of retinoblastoma, a type of eye cancer that typically develops in children, have an increased risk of nasal cavity cancer if the retinoblastoma was treated with radiation.We don’t know what causes each case of nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer. But we do know some of the risk factors for these cancers (See Risk Factors for Nasal Cavity and Paranasal Sinus Cancers) and how some of them cause normal cells to become cancer. For example, some risk factors, such as workplace exposure to certain chemicals, may cause these cancers by damaging the DNA of cells that line the inside of the nose and sinuses.
Genes and cancer
The development of normal human cells mostly depends on the information contained in the cells’ DNA. DNA is the chemical in our cells that makes up our genes – the instructions for how our cells function. We usually look like our parents because they are the source of our DNA. But, DNA affects more than how we look.
Some genes have instructions for controlling when cells grow, divide, and die:

Genes that help cells grow, divide, and stay alive are called proto-oncogenes.
Genes that help keep cell growth under control or make cells die at the right time are called tumor suppressor genes.

Cancers can be caused by DNA changes that turn on proto-oncogenes or turn off tumor suppressor genes. This leads to cells growing out of control. Changes in many different genes are usually needed to cause nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer.
For more about how gene changes can lead to cancer, see Genes and Cancer.
Workplace exposures and tobacco
Scientists believe that some risk factors, such as workplace exposures to certain chemicals and tobacco use, cause these cancers by damaging the DNA of the cells that line the inside of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses.
Human papillomavirus (HPV) 
High-risk types of HPV have been linked to oropharyngeal cancers. Some high-risk types of HPV have been found in some nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers, but because these types of cancers are very rare, more research is needed to say for sure if HPV infection causes them.
Inherited and acquired gene mutations
Some people inherit DNA mutations (changes) from their parents that increase their risk for developing certain cancers. But inherited gene changes are not believed to cause very many cancers of the nasal cavity or paranasal sinuses.
Gene changes related to these cancers usually develop during life rather than being inherited. These acquired mutations are often the result of exposure to cancer-causing chemicals like those found in the workplace or in tobacco smoke. Acquired mutations probably cause most nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers, but sometimes they happen for no apparent reason.
Not all cancers have the same gene changes. So far, few specific gene changes have been found in nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers.Most people with cancer of the nasal cavity (nose) and paranasal sinuses have no known risk factors, so there is currently no way to prevent most of these cancers. But there are some things people can do to lower their risk.
Avoid workplace chemicals and dust
Not all nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers can be prevented, but the risk of developing these cancers can be greatly reduced by avoiding exposures to certain substances in the workplace. Fortunately, awareness of the possible danger from these exposures has increased, and workplace safety measures to help protect people have improved. Still, if you are working with any of the substances listed in Risk Factors for Nasal Cavity and Paranasal Sinus Cancers, it’s important for you to find out if you are being protected from harmful exposure.
Avoid smoking
Smoking is another risk factor for cancers of the nasal cavity and sinuses that people can avoid to help prevent the disease.Small cancers of the nasal cavity (nose) and paranasal sinuses usually do not cause any specific symptoms that help doctors find them at an early stage (when they're small and easier to treat). Many of the symptoms of nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers can also be caused by benign (non-cancer) conditions like infections. Because of this, many of these cancers aren't found until they have grown large enough to block the nasal airway or sinuses, or until they've spread to nearby tissues or even to distant parts of the body.
Still, some nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers can be found early. Talk to your doctor if you have symptoms such as those described in Signs and Symptoms of Nasal Cavity and Paranasal Sinus Cancers. Most of these symptoms are much more likely to be caused by less serious problems. Still, it’s important to see a doctor so that the cause can be found and treated, if needed.
Screening
Screening refers to tests and exams to find a disease, such as cancer or pre-cancer, in people who don't have any symptoms. Screening can find some types of cancer early, when treatment tends to work best. But at this time there's no simple screening test that can find nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers early. These cancers are also quite rare. Because of this, neither the American Cancer Society nor any other group recommends routine screening for these cancers at this time.In most cases, nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers are found because of problems they cause. Finding these cancers in people without symptoms is rare and usually accidental (while doing tests to check for other medical problems). Possible signs and symptoms of these cancers (often only on one side) include:

Nasal congestion and stuffiness that doesn’t get better or even worsens
Pain above or below the eyes
Blockage of one side of the nose
Post-nasal drip (nasal drainage in the back of the nose and throat)
Nosebleeds
Pus draining from the nose
Problems with your sense of smell
Numbness or pain in parts of the face
Loosening or numbness of teeth
A lump or mass on the face, palate (top of the mouth), or inside the nose
Constant watery eyes
Bulging of one eye
Loss or change in vision
Pain or pressure in one of the ears
Hearing loss
Headache
Trouble opening the mouth
Enlarging lymph nodes in the neck (seen or felt as lumps under the skin)

Having one or more of these symptoms doesn't mean you have nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer. In fact, many of these symptoms are more likely to be caused by other conditions. Still, if you have any of these symptoms, it's important to have them checked by a doctor so that the cause can be found and treated, if needed. If treatment (like with an antibiotic) doesn't work, be sure to go back to your doctor for more testing.Nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers are usually found because of signs or symptoms a person is having. If cancer is suspected, tests will be done, sometimes by specialists, to confirm the diagnosis.
Medical history and physical exam
You will be asked about your medical history, any problems you've been having, and possible risk factors such as where you work and what chemicals you work with. The doctor will physically examine you to look for signs of nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer, as well as other health problems.
During the exam, the doctor will carefully check your head and neck area, including the nose and sinuses, for numbness, pain, swelling, and/or firmness in your face and the lymph nodes in your neck. The doctor will look for changes in the symmetry of your eyes and face (both sides should be about the same), vision changes, and any other problems.
Exam by a specialist
If your doctor thinks you might have cancer of the nasal cavity or paranasal sinuses, you'll be sent to see an otolaryngologist (a doctor who specializes in diseases of the ear, nose, and throat; also called an ENT doctor). This doctor will carefully check your nasal passages and the rest of your head and neck.
They might also examine your nose, throat, tongue, and mouth areas which can be done with a headlamp and small mirrors (indirect endoscopy) or with a nasal endoscope (a thin, flexible, lighted tube that's put in through your nose). A biopsy (a piece of tissue) may be removed during the endoscopy if an abnormal area is seen. 
People with nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer also have a higher risk for other cancers in the head and neck region. So all areas of the head and neck will be looked at carefully for signs of cancer.
Imaging tests
Imaging tests use x-rays, magnetic fields, or radioactive substances to create pictures of the inside of your body. Imaging tests are not used to diagnose nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancers, but they might be done for a number of reasons both before and after a cancer diagnosis, including:

To help look for a cancer if one is suspected
To see if a tumor can be safely biopsied without causing a lot of bleeding (see below)
To learn how far the cancer might have spread (metastasized)
To see if the cancer can be removed with surgery
To help determine if treatment is working
To look for signs that the cancer has come back after treatment (recurred)

X-rays
X-rays of the head area, mainly of the sinuses, can show if there's any fluid or masses in the sinuses (normal sinuses should be filled with air). This would suggest that something is wrong, but it may not be a tumor. Most of the time, an abnormal-looking sinus x-ray means there's an infection. Sinus x-rays are not often done because many doctors prefer to do a computed tomography (CT) scan instead which gives a more detailed picture than an x-ray.
If you've been diagnosed with nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer, an x-ray of the chest might be done to find out if the cancer has spread to your lungs, which is the most common site of spread other than lymph nodes in the neck.
Computed tomography (CT) scan
A CT scan (or CAT scan) uses x-rays to make detailed cross-sectional images of the inside of your body. This test is very useful in finding cancers of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses, measuring the size of the tumor, showing if it is growing into nearby tissues, and if it has spread to the lymph nodes in the neck. Bone details show up well on a CT scan and it can show if a tumor has damaged the bone around it. A chest CT might also be used to see if the cancer has spread to the lungs.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan
Like CT scans, MRI scans show detailed images of the body. But MRI scans use radio waves and strong magnets instead of x-rays. MRI scans are very helpful in looking at cancers of the nasal cavities and paranasal sinuses. They are better than CT scans in telling whether a change is fluid or a tumor. Sometimes they can help the doctor tell the difference between a lump that is cancer and one that is not. They can also show if a tumor has spread into nearby soft tissues, like the eyeball, brain, or blood vessels.
Positron emission tomography (PET) scan
A PET scan uses a slightly radioactive form of sugar (known as fluorodeoxyglucose or FDG) that's injected into your blood and collects mainly in cancer cells. A special scanner is then used to create pictures of the places where the radioactivity collected in your body.
A PET scan may be used to look for possible areas of cancer spread, or if a CT or MRI scan does not show an obvious tumor. This test also can be used to help see if a change seen on another imaging test is cancer or not.
PET/CT scan: A PET scan is often done along with a CT scan using a machine that can do both scans at the same time. This lets the doctor compare areas of higher radioactivity on the PET scan with the detailed pictures from the CT scan.
Bone scan
For a bone scan, a small amount of low-level radioactive material is injected into the blood and collects mainly in abnormal areas of bone. A bone scan can help show if a cancer has spread to the bones. This test isn’t needed very often because PET scans can usually show if cancer has spread to the bones.
Biopsy
In a biopsy, a doctor takes out a small piece of tissue (a sample) from the suspicious area to be checked closely in the lab. It's the only way to know for sure if you have nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer. If cancer is found, testing in the lab can also show what kind of cancer it is and how aggressive it is (how fast it will grow and spread). This information is needed to help plan the best treatment.
Doctors look closely at where the tumor is and the blood vessels around it when deciding where and how to do the biopsy.
Often, biopsies are done in the doctor’s office or clinic. Drugs are used to numb the area. If the tumor is in a place that is hard to get to or may bleed a lot, the biopsy will be done in an operating room. Many types of biopsies can be used to diagnose nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer and are described below. See Testing Biopsy and Cytology Specimens for Cancer for added information.
Fine needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy
In this type of biopsy, the doctor puts a thin, hollow needle right into a tumor or lymph node to take out cells and/or a few drops of fluid. The doctor may repeat this to take several samples. The cells can then be checked closely in the lab to see if they are cancer.
An FNA biopsy is often used in patients with swollen lymph nodes in the neck. In these patients, An FNA biopsy can show if the lymph node swelling is from cancer or if it's from an infection. If the FNA does not show cancer, it only means that cancer was not found in that lymph node. There could still be cancer in other places. If you're having symptoms that might be from a nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer, you could still need other tests to find the cause of the symptoms.
FNA biopsies might also be useful in some patients already diagnosed with nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer. If the person has a lump in the neck, an FNA can show if the mass is cancer. FNA might also be used in patients whose cancer has been treated by surgery and/or radiation therapy, to help find out if a neck mass in the treated area is scar tissue or if it is the cancer that has come back (recurrence).
Incisional and excisional biopsies
These types of biopsies remove more of the tumor using minor surgery. They're the more common types of biopsies done for nasal and paranasal sinus tumors. Biopsies of tumors in the nose may be done using special tools that are put into the nose. Biopsies of tumors that are deeper within the skull may require a more involved procedure (see below).
For an incisional biopsy, the surgeon cuts out a small piece of the tumor. For an excisional biopsy, the entire tumor is removed. In either case, the biopsy sample is then sent to the lab for testing.
Endoscopic versus open biopsy
For tumors deeper within the skull, how the biopsy is done depends on where it is and how big it is.
Endoscopic biopsy: Some tumors that are deep in the nasal passages may be reached using an endoscope – a thin, flexible lighted tube. Long, thin surgical tools can be passed through the endoscope to get a biopsy sample.
Open (surgical) biopsy: For tumors inside the sinuses, the doctor may have to cut through the skin next to the nose and through the underlying bones to reach them. These operations are covered in more detail in Surgery for Nasal Cavity and Paranasal Sinus Cancer.
Lab tests of biopsy samples
Biopsy samples (from endoscopy or surgery) are sent to a lab where they are looked at closely. If cancer is found, more lab tests may be done on the biopsy samples to help better classify the cancer and possibly find specific treatment options.
Tests for certain proteins on tumor cells: If the cancer has spread (metastasized) or come back, doctors will probably look for certain proteins on the cancer cells. For example, cancer cells might be tested for the PD-L1 protein, which may predict if the cancer is more likely to respond to treatment with certain immunotherapy drugs.
Other pre-treatment tests
Other tests may be done in people diagnosed with nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer. These tests are not used to diagnose the cancer, but they might be done to see if a person is healthy enough for certain treatments, like surgery or chemotherapy.
Quit smoking: It is very important to quit smoking before any treatment for nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer. If you quit smoking cigarettes before being diagnosed, it is important to not start during treatment. Smoking during treatment can cause a poor response to radiation treatment, poor wound healing, poor tolerance to chemotherapy, and a higher chance of dying.  
Blood tests: A complete blood count (CBC) looks at whether your blood has normal numbers of different types of blood cells. For example, it can show if you are anemic (have a low number of red blood cells), if you could have trouble with bleeding (from a low number of blood platelets), or if you are at increased risk for infections (because of a low number of white blood cells). This test could be repeated regularly during treatment, as many cancer drugs can lower the number of blood cells produced by the bone marrow.﻿ Blood chemistry test results can help show how well your liver or kidneys are working.
Pre-surgery: If surgery is planned, you might also be given an electrocardiogram (ECG) to make sure your heart is working well. Some people having surgery also may need lung tests known as pulmonary function tests (PFTs).
Dental exam: Your cancer care team might have you see your dentist before any radiation is given since it can damage the saliva (spit) glands and cause dry mouth. This can raise the chance of cavities, infection, and breakdown of the jawbone. The dentist might also pull some teeth before radiation that they think might cause problems during treatment.
Hearing test: The most commonly used chemotherapy drug in treating nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancer, cisplatin, can affect your hearing. Your hearing will most likely be checked (with an audiogram) before starting treatment. Your doctor may also change your chemotherapy plan if you already have difficulty hearing.
Nutrition and speech tests: If you have lost a lot of weight because of the cancer, you might have a nutritionist who will evaluate your nutrition status before, during, and after your treatment to try and keep your body weight and protein levels as normal as possible. You might also visit with a speech therapist who will test your ability to swallow and speak depending on the location of the cancer. They might give you exercises to do during treatment to help strengthen the muscles in the head and neck area so that you can eat and talk normally after cancer treatment.After someone is diagnosed with a nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer, doctors will try to figure out if it has spread, and if so, how far. This process is called staging. The stage of a cancer describes how much cancer is in the body. It helps determine how serious the cancer is and how best to treat it. Doctors also use a cancer's stage when talking about survival statistics.
The earliest stage of nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers is stage 0, also known as carcinoma in situ (CIS). The other stages range from I (1) through IV (4). Some stages are split further, using capital letters (A, B, etc.). As a rule, the lower the number, the less the cancer has spread. A higher number, such as stage IV, means cancer has spread more. And within a stage, an earlier letter means a lower stage. Although each person’s cancer experience is unique, cancers with similar stages tend to have a similar outlook and are often treated in much the same way.
How is the stage determined?
The staging system most often used for nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers is the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) TNM system, which is based on 3 key pieces of information:

The extent of the main tumor (T): Where is the tumor? How far has it grown into nearby structures?
The spread to nearby lymph nodes (N): Has the cancer spread to nearby lymph nodes in the neck? If so, how many are affected, are they on the same side where the cancer started, and how large are they?
The spread (metastasis) to distant sites (M): Has the cancer spread to distant parts of the body, such as the lungs or bones?

Numbers or letters after T, N, and M provide more details about each of these factors. Higher numbers mean the cancer is more advanced.  Once the T, N, and M categories of the cancer have been determined, this information is combined in a process called stage grouping to assign an overall stage. For more information, see Cancer Staging.
Nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers are typically given a clinical stage based on the results of any exams, biopsies, and imaging tests that might have been done (as described in Tests for Nasal Cavity and Paranasal Sinus Cancers ). If surgery has been done, the pathologic stage (also called the surgical stage) can be determined. The stages descriptions below use the pathologic (surgical) definitions.
The stages of nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers are slightly different, based on where the cancer starts. They are grouped together as:

Cancers that start in the nasal cavity or ethmoid sinus
Cancers that start in the maxillary sinus

The system described here is the most recent AJCC system, effective January 2018. 
Nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancer staging can be complex. If you have questions about the stage of your cancer and what it might mean for you, ask your doctor to explain it to you in a way you understand.
Explore the 3D interactive model to learn more about the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses.Survival rates can give you an idea of what percentage of people with the same type and stage of cancer are still alive a certain amount of time (usually 5 years) after they were diagnosed. They can’t tell you how long you will live, but they may help give you a better understanding of how likely it is that your treatment will be successful.
Keep in mind that survival rates are estimates and are often based on previous outcomes of large numbers of people who had a specific cancer, but they can’t predict what will happen in any particular person’s case. These statistics can be confusing and may lead you to have more questions. Your doctor is familiar with your situation; ask how these numbers may apply to you. 
What is a 5-year relative survival rate?
A relative survival rate compares people with the same type and stage of cancer to people in the overall population. For example, if the 5-year relative survival rate for a specific stage of nasal cavity (nose) or paranasal sinus cancer is 80%, it means that people who have that cancer are, on average, about 80% as likely as people who don’t have that cancer to live for at least 5 years after being diagnosed.
Where do these survival rate numbers come from?
The American Cancer Society relies on information from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database, maintained by the National Cancer Institute (NCI), to provide survival statistics for different types of cancer.
The SEER database tracks 5-year relative survival rates for nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancer in the United States, based on how far the cancer has spread. The SEER database, however, does not group cancers by AJCC TNM stages (stages I to IV). Instead, it groups cancers into localized, regional, and distant stages:

Localized: There is no sign that the cancer has spread outside of the nasal cavity (or paranasal sinus).
Regional: The cancer has spread outside the nasal cavity (or paranasal sinus) to nearby structures or lymph nodes.
Distant: The cancer has spread to distant parts of the body, such as the lungs.

5-year relative survival rates for nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers
These numbers are based on people diagnosed with cancers of the nasal cavity or paranasal sinus between 2012 and 2018.



SEER stage
5-year relative survival rate


Localized
86%


Regional
52%


Distant
43%


All SEER stages combined
59%



Understanding the numbers

These numbers apply only to the stage of the cancer when it is first diagnosed. They do not apply later on if the cancer grows, spreads, or comes back after treatment.
These numbers don’t take everything into account. Survival rates are grouped based on how far the cancer has spread. But other factors, such as your age and overall health, the type of nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer you have, and how well the cancer responds to treatment, can also affect your outlook.
People now being diagnosed with nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer may have a better outlook than these numbers show. Treatments improve over time, and these numbers are based on people who were diagnosed and treated at least 5 years earlier.It’s important to have honest, open discussions with your doctor and cancer care team. They want to answer all of your questions, so that you can make informed treatment decisions. For instance, consider these questions:
When you’re told you have nasal cavity (nose) or paranasal sinus cancer

Where is my cancer located?
What kind of nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer do I have?
If I’m concerned about the costs and insurance coverage for my diagnosis and treatment, who can help me?
Has my cancer spread beyond where it started?
What is the stage (extent) of my cancer, and what does that mean?
Will I need other tests before we can decide on treatment?
Will I need to see other doctors or specialists?

When deciding on a treatment plan for nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer

How much experience do you have treating this type of cancer?
What are my treatment choices?
What do you recommend and why?
If surgery is part of my treatment, what kind are you recommending? Will I need reconstruction surgery also? What options for reconstruction do I have?
Will surgery make it hard for me to eat, talk, or see?
What is the goal of the treatment?
What are the chances that I  can be cured of this cancer with these treatment options?
How fast do I need to decide on treatment?
What can I do to be ready for treatment?
How long will treatment last? What will be done?
Where will I get treatment ?
Will treatment affect my daily activities? Can I still work fulltime?
What risks or side effects are there to the treatments you suggest? How long will they last?
What can I do to prevent or reduce the side effects?
Should I get a second opinion? How do I do that? Can you recommend someone?
Will this treatment change the way I look?
What other choices will I have if the treatment doesn’t work or if the cancer comes back (recurs) after treatment?
What if I have problems getting to and from treatment?
Do you know of any clinical trials I might be eligible for?

During treatment for nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer
Once treatment begins, you’ll need to know what to expect and what to look for. Not all of these questions may apply to you, but asking the ones that do may be helpful.

How will I know if the treatment is working?
Is there anything I can do to help manage side effects?
What symptoms or side effects should I tell you about right away?
How can I reach you on nights, holidays, or weekends?
Do I need to change what I eat during treatment?
Are there any limits on what I can do or what I can eat?
Can I exercise during treatment? If so, what kind should I do, and how often?
Can you suggest a mental health professional if I start to feel overwhelmed, depressed, or distressed?
What social support is available during treatment if my family is far away?

After treatment for nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer

Will I need a special diet after treatment?
Will I need to see a specialist to evaluate how I speak and swallow ?
Are there any limits on what I can do?
What symptoms should I watch for?
What kind of exercise should I do now?
How often will I need to have follow-up exams and imaging tests?
When should my next tests be done?
Will I need any blood tests?
How will we know if the cancer has come back? What should I watch for?
What will my options be if the cancer comes back?

Along with these examples, be sure to write down some of your own. For instance, you might want more information about recovery times so you can plan your work or activity schedule.
Keep in mind that doctors aren’t the only ones who can give you information. Other health care professionals, such as nurses and social workers, can answer some of your questions. To find out more about speaking with your health care team, see The Doctor-Patient Relationship.Studies have shown that people who are treated at centers that treat a lot of head and neck cancers with surgery, tend to live longer. And because of the complicated types of surgeries, along with the need for coordination between cancer specialists to make a complete treatment plan, it’s very important to have treatment at cancer centers by surgeons who have experience in these cancers. 
Quit smoking before nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancer surgery
If you smoke, you should quit. Smoking during cancer treatment is linked to poor wound healing, more side effects, and less benefit from treatment which can raise your risk of the cancer coming back (recurrence). Smoking after treatment can also increase the chance of getting another new cancer. Quitting smoking for good (before treatment starts, if possible) is the best way to improve your chances of survival.  It is never too late to quit. For help, see How To Quit Using Tobacco.
What kind of surgery is done to treat nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer?
For most nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancers, surgery to remove the cancer (and some of the surrounding bone or other nearby tissues) is a key part of treatment. Often, surgery is used with other treatments, like radiation therapy and/or chemotherapy to get the best results.
The nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses are close to many important nerves, blood vessels, and other structures. The brain, eyes, mouth, and carotid arteries (arteries that supply blood to the brain) are also close by, making surgical planning and surgery itself difficult. The goal of surgery in these areas is to take out the entire tumor and a small amount of normal tissue around it while keeping appearance and function (such as breathing, speech, chewing, and swallowing) as normal as possible. Rebuilding and/or repairing the area around the tumor is an important part of the surgery plan and may require the help of a plastic surgeon.
Surgical margins: When removing the cancer, the surgeon also tries to take out a border (margin) of surrounding normal tissue. The tissue that's removed will be checked in the lab to see if there are cancer cells at the edges. If the edges don’t have cancer cells, the cancer is said to have been removed with negative or clear margins. Negative margins mean that it's less likely that any cancer was left behind. If the edges do have cancer cells, the margins are said to be positive. Positive margins mean that it's more likely that some cancer was left behind. Often this means more treatment, such as more surgery or radiation.
Surgery for nasal cavity cancers
Nasal cavity cancers are often removed in a procedure called wide local excision. This means removing the tumor plus an edge of normal tissue around it. The goal is to remove enough tissue so that no cancer cells remain.
If the tumor is in the middle dividing wall of the nasal cavity (the nasal septum), sometimes the entire septum or a large portion of it will be taken out.
If the tumor is in the lateral (side) wall of the nasal cavity, this wall may need to be removed by a procedure called an open medial maxillectomy. To do this, the surgeon will usually cut through the skin along the side or edge of the nose and fold the external nose toward the opposite side to see and work on the tumor. Then the side of the nasal cavity can be removed by cutting the bone and soft tissue as needed. Sometimes, if the cancer is in a certain spot, the surgeon can reach the tumor by cutting under the upper lip instead. This approach has the advantage of avoiding any cuts, and maybe scars, on the skin. Ask your head and neck surgeon how your surgery will be done.
Reconstructive surgery: If the cancer has reached the skin or deeply invades the tissue of the external nose, part (or all) of the nose may need to be removed. There are many ways to rebuild a nose using tissue from the face or other areas. In some cases, a cosmetic prosthesis (made of artificial materials) may be used to make a new nose.
Surgery for paranasal sinus cancers
Operations for paranasal sinus tumors vary, depending on the tumor type, location, size, and growth into other parts of the head and neck.
If the tumor is small and/or it's not cancer (benign) and is only in the ethmoid sinuses, an open external ethmoidectomy may be done. The surgeon will cut through the skin on the upper side of the nose next to the upper eyelid. Bone on the inner side of the orbit (eye socket) and nose will be removed to reach tumors inside the ethmoid sinuses.
If the tumor also has grown into the maxillary sinus, an open maxillectomy may be done. The type of maxillectomy depends on where the tumor is and whether it has grown into nearby tissues. The surgeon may make an incision (cut) along the side of the nose from the eyebrow or upper eyelid down to or through the upper lip. Or the incision may be made under the upper lip. The bones around the maxillary sinus are cut so that the entire tumor and some surrounding tissue can be taken out in one piece. This operation might remove bone from the hard palate (the roof of the mouth), upper teeth on one side of the mouth, part or all of the orbit (eye socket), part of the cheekbone, and/or the bony part of the upper nose.
If the cancer is a higher stage, has spread into the base of the skull or brain, or is in the ethmoid sinuses, frontal sinuses, and/or the sphenoid sinuses, an operation called an open craniofacial resection may be done. This operation is a lot like a maxillectomy except that the surgeon may also remove upper parts of the eye socket and the front base of the skull. This is a major operation that's usually done by a surgical team that includes an otolaryngologist (head and neck surgeon) and a neurosurgeon (a surgeon who operates on the brain, spinal cord, and other nerves).
Reconstructive surgery: Depending on how much tissue or bone is removed during surgery, reconstruction of the hard palate with a soft tissue flap with or without a bone graft might be done to help someone eat and talk after surgery. Reconstruction of the eye socket might also allow the placement of an ocular prosthesis (glass eye or fake eye).
What is endoscopic surgery for nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer?
In this type of surgery, the surgeon uses an endoscope (a thin, flexible tube with a light on the end that's put into the nose to reach the nasal cavity or sinus) to see and remove the tumor in the nasal cavity or sinus. This way, the surgeon doesn't have to cut through skin and bone to open up the whole cavity, as is typically done in an open operation. This reduces the damage to normal tissue. In general, recovering from this type of surgery takes less time. And for some of these cancers, long-term outcomes for endoscopic surgery are as good as other open surgeries used to treat these cancers.
Endoscopic surgery may also be used alone or along with some of the more invasive open surgeries listed above. In this case, it may help limit damage to healthy tissues. It also may help the doctor better see the area to try to be sure all of the cancer has been taken out. (You may hear this called endoscopic-assisted surgery.)
Endoscopic surgery is most often used for small tumors. For larger tumors, it may be used to help try to control the tumor in people who are not healthy enough for a bigger operation.
Endoscopic approaches to remove nasal and sinus cancers are becoming more common as more surgeons are trained in these techniques. These approaches are best done by teams of experienced surgeons at specialized centers. Some medical centers (and surgeons) have more experience than others with endoscopic surgery for nasal and sinus cancers. If you're considering endoscopic surgery as a part of your treatment, be sure to ask about your surgeon’s training and experience, which are key to successful endoscopic surgery.
Removing lymph nodes in nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancers
Cancers of the nasal cavity or paranasal sinuses sometimes spread to the lymph nodes in the neck. Depending on the stage and location of the cancer, these lymph nodes may need to be removed in an operation called a neck dissection.
There are several types of neck dissection procedures. The goal of these procedures is to remove lymph nodes known to or likely to contain cancer. The amount of neck tissue removed depends on the cancer’s size and the extent of spread to lymph nodes.

A radical neck dissection (comprehensive neck dissection) removes nearly all lymph nodes on one side of the neck as well as major muscles, nerves, and veins. This can make it hard to move your neck or shoulder well.
A modified radical neck dissection (modified comprehensive neck dissection) removes most lymph nodes on one side of the neck between the jawbone and collarbone, but only some muscle and nerve tissue.
A selective neck dissection is more limited and removes only a few lymph nodes from specific areas of the neck where the cancer most likely spread.

Gastrostomy tubes (feeding tubes)
Cancers in the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses might make it hard for you to swallow enough food to maintain good nutrition and a healthy weight. This can make you weak and make it harder to finish treatment.
Some people with these cancers might need to have a feeding tube, usually called a gastrostomy tube (or G-tube), put in place before treatment. A G-tube is a feeding tube that's put through the skin and muscle of your abdomen (belly) right into your stomach. The tube is often put in place with the help of a flexible, lighted instrument (endoscope) passed down your mouth and into the stomach. This is done while you are sedated. When it's placed through an upper endoscopy, it's called a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy, or PEG tube. Another option is to put the tube in during an operation. Once in place, liquid nutrition and medicines can be put right into the stomach through the tube.
Often, the gastrostomy tube is only needed for a short time to help you get enough nutrition during cancer treatment. The tube is often removed once you can swallow again after treatment. It's important to keep swallowing even when you're getting most of your nutrition through a G-tube. This helps keep those muscles working and gives you a better chance of going back to normal swallowing after treatment is complete.
Possible risks and side effects of surgery for nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer
All surgery has some risks, including blood clots, infections, complications from anesthesia (medicine to put you to sleep), poor wound healing, and pneumonia. These risks are generally low, but are higher in more complicated operations. Rarely, some people may not survive the surgery.
Pain is a common side effect of surgery. It's also common to have nasal drainage and crusting. Sometimes it smells bad. This usually starts getting better about 6 months after surgery, but may last longer if you're getting radiation. 
Surgery for cancers that are large or hard to reach may be very complicated, in which case side effects may include infection, nose bleeds, scarring, problems eating and talking, and vision changes. Surgery also can be disfiguring, especially if bones in the nose or face need to be removed.
Eye changes: Because these cancers tend to not cause problems until they're quite large, they often involve the eye or orbit (the bone and tissue around the eye) by the time they are noticed or cause symptoms. Most of the time the eye can be saved, but sometimes the entire orbit and eyeball needs to be removed to give the best chance for cure.
Body image: Because the changes from surgery can be visible, these procedures can have a major effect on how people see themselves. The surgeon will take into account how the face will look and function after surgery. But, depending on the extent of the operation needed, you might look different after surgery. This can range from a simple scar on the side of your nose to major changes if nerves, parts of bones, or other structures need to be removed. It’s important to talk with your doctor about these changes before the surgery. Your doctor might be able to help you prepare for them. They can also give you an idea about your options, such as reconstructive surgery, tissue grafts, or a prosthesis (man-made replacement). For example, an obturator is a custom-made prosthesis used to help restore function in the nose and mouth. An obturator that replaces the roof of the mouth can help you speak and swallow normally. Noses can be made out of plastic, tinted to match the skin, and attached to the face. All of these things can help a person’s self-esteem.
More serious side effects and complications: Since there are many important structures in the nasal cavity and paranasal sinus areas, some surgeries can cause severe complications including blindness, leakage of the cerebral spinal fluid (the fluid around the brain and spinal cord), meningitis (inflammation of the lining of the brain and spinal cord), weakness or numbness of the middle part of the face, spasm of the jaw muscles making it hard to open your mouth, or an abscess (a collection of pus from an infection).
Possible risks and side effects of neck dissection for nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer
The most common side effects of any neck dissection are numbness of the ear, weakness in raising the arm above the head, pain in the shoulder and neck, and weakness of the lower lip. These develop when nerves are damaged. After a selective neck dissection, the weakness of the arm and lower lip usually go away after a few months. But if a nerve has been removed as part of a radical neck dissection or because of tumor spread, the weakness will be permanent. After any type of neck dissection, physical therapists can teach the patient exercises to improve neck and shoulder movement.
While some swelling is normal after surgery, it should go away over time. When lymph nodes are removed, it changes how fluid drains from the head, face, and neck. The fluid might not be able to drain like it should. This can cause swelling in these areas called lymphedema. This side effect can develop anytime after lymph node dissection, even many years later. You might be referred to a lymphedema therapist who is specially trained in handling this type of edema in the head and neck area.Studies have shown that people who are treated at centers that treat a lot of head and neck cancers with radiation, tend to live longer. And because of the complicated types of surgeries, along with the need for coordination between cancer specialists to make a complete treatment plan, it’s very important to have treatment at cancer centers by radiation oncologists who have experience in treating these cancers. 
Radiation therapy uses high-energy rays or particles to kill cancer cells. When treating nasal and paranasal sinus cancers, radiation might be used in many ways:

As the main (primary) treatment for people with small nasal cavity tumors. It doesn't change the way people look as much as surgery does.


As the main treatment for people who can't have surgery due to poor health or because the tumor is too advanced to remove with surgery.
After surgery (adjuvant treatment), to try to kill any small areas of cancer that are not visible at the time of surgery that might be left behind. This the most common treatment for these tumors -- surgery then radiation (sometimes given with chemotherapy).
Before surgery (neoadjuvant treatment) to try to shrink the tumor so it's easier to remove. It might be given along with chemo.
To help ease problems caused by the cancer, like pain, bleeding, and trouble swallowing when cancer spreads to areas beyond the head and neck. This is called palliative or supportive treatment.
To treat cancer that has come back after treatment (recurrence).
To treat lymph nodes in the neck even if they don't appear to have cancer cells in them. But not all doctors agree on this.
For advanced nasal cavity or paranasal sinus tumors, chemotherapy is given along with the radiation. This is called chemoradiation. It often works better than radiation alone, but it also has more side effects. (See Chemotherapy for Nasal Cavity and Paranasal Sinus Cancer for more details.)

Radiation to this part of your body can affect your teeth and gums.  Before starting radiation treatments you will be advised to see a dentist. A dentist can make sure your mouth is healthy before treatment. They might recommend that certain teeth be removed before you start radiation because this can increase your chance of infection during treatment. During and after treatment your dentist can help check for and treat any problems that may come up, such as infection or tooth and bone damage.
Quit smoking before nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancer treatment
If you smoke, you should quit. Your cancer might not shrink as well if you smoke during radiation treatment, you might have more side effects, and your benefit from radiation treatment might be less (which can raise your risk of the cancer coming back).   Smoking after treatment can also increase the chance of getting another new cancer. Quitting smoking for good (before treatment starts, if possible) is the best way to improve your chances of survival. It is never too late to quit. For help, see How To Quit Using Tobacco.
What type of radiation therapy is used to treat nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer?
The types of radiation therapy that might be used to treat nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancer are:

External beam radiation therapy (EBRT)
Brachytherapy (internal radiation)

External beam radiation therapy
The main type of radiation therapy used to treat nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancer is external beam radiation therapy. External beam radiation therapy focuses a beam of radiation from a machine outside of the body onto the cancer.
These tumors are close to the eyes, brain, glands, nerves, and blood vessels. Before your treatments start, the radiation team will use a CT scan to take careful measurements to determine the correct angles for aiming the radiation beams and the proper dose of radiation. A flexible but sturdy head and neck mask made of plastic mesh might be made to hold your head, neck, and shoulders in the exact same position for each treatment. Some people might feel a bit confined while this mask is on and might need to ask for medicine to help them relax during the treatment. Sometimes, the mask can be adjusted so that it is not too constricting. Your radiation oncologist can discuss the options with you. You might also be fitted for a bite block that you hold in your mouth during treatment.
Standard external beam radiation therapy for nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers is given in daily fractions (doses) 5 days a week for about 6 to 7 weeks. Other schedules for radiation may be used, too.

Hyperfractionation refers to a slightly lower radiation dose that is given more than once a day (for example, twice a day for 7 weeks). Hyperfractionation is a schedule that is used often to deliver radiation for these cancers.
Accelerated fractionation refers to the standard radiation dose being given each day but over a shorter amount of time (5 to 6 weeks) instead of the usual 7 weeks. For example, radiation is given 6 days a week over 5 weeks instead of the standard 5 days a week for 7 weeks.

There are also more advanced EBRT techniques that help doctors focus the radiation more precisely:

Three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy (3-D CRT): 3D-CRT uses the results of imaging tests and special computers to map the exact location of the tumor. Several radiation beams are then shaped and aimed at the tumor from different directions. Each beam alone is fairly weak, which makes it less likely to damage the normal tissues it passes through. But the beams all meet at the tumor to give a high dose of radiation there.
Intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT): IMRT is an advanced form of 3D-CRT therapy. IMRT is the standard way to deliver external beam radiation for these cancers.  It uses a computer-driven machine that actually moves around the patient as it delivers radiation. Along with shaping the beams and aiming them at the tumor from several angles, the intensity (strength) of the beams can be adjusted to limit the dose reaching the nearby normal tissues. This may let the doctor deliver a higher dose to the tumor with fewer side effects. 

Proton beam radiation therapy
Proton beam radiation therapy focuses beams of protons instead of x-rays on the cancer. Unlike x-rays, which go through the patient and expose the body to radiation both before and after they hit the tumor, protons stop moving after traveling a certain distance. So the tissues behind the tumor are almost protected from radiation and even tissues in front of the tumor are exposed to less radiation than the tumor. This means that proton beam radiation can deliver radiation to the cancer while doing less damage to nearby normal tissues. Because there are so many critical structures close by, proton beam radiation can be used to treat certain tumors of the nasal cavity or paranasal sinuses. But more studies are needed with proton therapy to evaluate long-term side effects and to see if it is better than IMRT.
Right now, proton beam therapy is not widely available. The machines needed to make protons are very expensive, and they aren’t available in many centers in the United States. Proton beam radiation might not be covered by all insurance companies at this time.
Brachytherapy
Brachytherapy (also called internal radiation or interstitial radiation), is another way to deliver radiation. Radioactive material is put right into or near the cancer. The radiation travels only a very short distance, which limits its damage of nearby normal tissues. This method of internal radiation therapy may be used with EBRT to treat nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers, but this is not common. More research is needed to know if it helps and how to best use it.
What are the possible side effects of radiation therapy for nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancers?
If you are going to get radiation therapy, it’s important to ask your doctor about the possible side effects so you know what to expect and can find ways to manage them.
Common side effects depend on where the radiation is aimed and can include:

Skin problems in the area being treated, ranging from redness to blistering and peeling
Nausea
Loss of appetite
Feeling tired or weak
Trouble swallowing
Hearing problems
Dry eyes or dry mouth
Hoarseness
Change of taste
Bone pain
Bone damage
Brain damage (this is rare)

Most of these side effects go away slowly when treatment is over but some side effects can be permanent. For example, if your eye is in the path of the radiation beam, it could change the way you see through that eye. Side effects of radiation tend to be worse if chemotherapy is given at the same time. Tell your doctor about any side effects you have because there are often ways to lessen them.
Mouth sores: People treated with radiation to the head, neck, and throat area can get painful sores in the mouth and throat that can make eating and drinking very hard. This can lead to weight loss and poor nutrition. Some people might need a feeding tube (called a gastrostomy or G-tube) during treatment to give them nutrition. The mouth sores heal with time after the radiation has stopped, but some people continue to have problems swallowing long after treatment ends.  Ask about swallowing exercises you can do to help keep those muscles working and increase your chance of eating normally after treatment.
Narrowing of the nasal cavity: Sometimes, radiation to the nasal cavity can cause the cavity to get smaller or cause the nasal cavity tissues to stick together. This might make it hard to breathe. Simple techniques like gently rotating a cotton swab covered with petroleum jelly in the nose or rinsing the inside of the cavity with salt water might help open the tightened area a little so breathing is not a problem.  
Dry mouth: Radiation aimed at the head and neck might damage the salivary (spit) glands, leading to dry mouth that doesn't get better with time. This can cause discomfort and problems swallowing. It can also lead to tooth decay and damage to the jaw bone. People treated with radiation to the neck and throat must pay close attention to their oral health and see their dentist regularly.
Hormone problems: If the pituitary or thyroid glands are exposed to radiation, they might be damaged. Your doctor will do blood tests to see how well these glands are working. You may need to take medicine if there are problems.
Lymphedema: Some people treated with radiation therapy might be at risk of developing lymphedema in the head and neck areas that were radiated. These areas can become swollen and firm. This can be worse if the person also had surgery. Sometimes medicines, physical therapy, or massage therapy might be helpful.
Damage to the carotid artery: Radiation to the neck area might increase a person’s risk of stroke many years after treatment. This might be because of health problems that were already present before radiation such as narrowing of the artery or an increase in plaques both of which can lower blood flow. People who smoke are also at risk. Because of this some doctors might schedule regular ultrasounds for you after treatment, to keep an eye on your arteries.Chemotherapy (chemo) is treatment with anti-cancer drugs that are injected into a vein or taken by mouth. These drugs enter the blood and reach most areas of the body.
If you smoke, you should quit. Smoking during chemotherapy treatment can cause more side effects and can cause the chemo drugs to not work as well. It can give you a higher chance of getting an infection and is linked to worse outcomes. Smoking also increases the risk of the cancer coming back after treatment and of getting another new cancer. Quitting smoking (before treatment starts, if possible) is the best way to improve your chances of survival. It is never too late to quit. 
Chemo may be used at different times during treatment for nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses:

Before surgery (neoadjuvant or induction chemo), often along with radiation therapy (called chemoradiation), to try to shrink the tumor and make surgery easier. Some call this organ preservation treatment because chemo given before surgery can “preserve” and not damage the structures in and near a critical organ. For example, induction chemo  may be used to try to save the eyeball if the cancer has spread there.
After surgery (adjuvant chemo), often with radiation therapy (chemoradiation) to try to kill any cancer cells that might have been left behind but can’t be seen on imaging tests. It can also help lower the chance the cancer will come back, especially if cancer is found at the edges (margins) of the removed tumor, or if the cancer has other features that make it more likely to come back.
As the main (primary) treatment, often along with radiation therapy (chemoradiation) for cancers that are too big or have spread too far into nearby tissues to be completely removed with surgery. Chemoradiation can also be used as the main treatment for people who are too sick for surgery or don't want to have surgery.
For metastatic cancer (cancer that has spread to distant organs) to control cancer growth when it has spread to other parts of the body and cannot be treated with surgery or radiation.

Chemoradiation
Chemoradiation is chemotherapy given at the same time as radiation. This combination has been shown to work better to shrink some of these tumors than using either treatment alone. It also might help lower the chance of cancer coming back after treatment (cancer recurrence) for some types of cancer.
How is chemotherapy given?
Chemo drugs for nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer are given into a vein (IV), often as an infusion over a certain period of time. This can be done in a doctor’s office, infusion center, or in a hospital setting.
Often, a slightly larger and sturdier IV access is required in the vein system to administer chemo. These are known as central venous catheters (CVCs), central venous access devices (CVADs), or central lines. They are used to put medicines, blood products, nutrients, or fluids right into your blood. They can also be used to take blood for testing. There are many different kinds of CVCs. The most common types are the port and the PICC line.
Chemo is given in cycles, followed by a rest period to give you time to recover from potential chemotherapy-related side effects. Cycles can be given weekly or every 3 weeks, but the schedule varies depending on the drugs used. For example, with some drugs, the chemo is given only on the first day of the cycle. With others, it is given for a few days in a row, or once a week. Then, at the end of the cycle, the chemo schedule repeats to start the next cycle.
Adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemo can be given over weeks or months, depending on the drugs used. The length of treatment depends on how well it is working and what side effects you might have. If you have any questions regarding chemotherapy discuss them with your medical oncologist.
Chemotherapy used to treat nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers
Chemo for nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers may include a combination of several drugs. These cancers are rare, so there aren’t many studies to help doctors decide the best way to treat them. Often, doctors treat them with the same drugs that are used for other, more common, cancers of the head and neck.
The most common types of nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers–squamous cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, and adenoid cystic carcinoma–can be grouped together as carcinomas. Some of the chemo drugs commonly used to treat carcinomas include:

Cisplatin
Carboplatin
5-fluorouracil (5-FU)
Docetaxel (Taxotere)
Paclitaxel (Taxol)
Methotrexate
Capecitabine (Xeloda), a pill that is converted to 5-FU once it gets to the tumor

The drugs used depend on many things, including the type of cancer, the extent of the cancer, the person’s overall health, and whether chemo is combined with radiation therapy. Chemotherapy drugs used first include cisplatin or carboplatin alone, or in combination with 5-FU, but other combinations are also available. For people who cannot tolerate chemo, the targeted therapy drug, cetuximab, is often used with radiation instead.
Different chemo drugs are used for nasal cavity and paranasal sinus sarcomas and melanomas. Information about chemotherapy for sarcomas may be found in Sarcoma: Adult Soft Tissue Cancer. Chemo for melanoma is covered in Melanoma Skin Cancer.
Possible side effects of chemotherapy for nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers 
Chemo drugs attack cells that are dividing quickly, which is why they work against cancer cells. But other cells in the body, such as those in the lining of the mouth and intestines, and the hair follicles, are also dividing quickly. These cells can be affected by chemo too, which can lead to side effects.
The side effects of chemotherapy depend on the type and dose of specific drugs used and how long you take them. Short-term side effects of chemo can include:

Nausea and vomiting
Loss of appetite or weight loss
Loss of hair
Mouth sores
Diarrhea
Nail changes
Skin changes
Ringing in the ears

Chemo can also affect the blood-forming cells in the bone marrow, which can lead to:

An increased chance of infection (from low white blood cell counts)
Easy bleeding or bruising (from low blood platelet counts)
Fatigue or shortness of breath (from low red blood cell counts)

Although most side effects get better once treatment is stopped, some can last a long time or even last forever. If your doctor plans treatment with chemotherapy, be sure to discuss the drugs that will be used and the possible side effects. Once chemotherapy is started, let your health care team know if you have side effects, so they can be treated. There are ways to prevent or treat many of the side effects related to chemotherapy. For instance, there are many drugs that can help prevent or treat nausea and vomiting. Sometimes, the doses of the chemo drugs may need to be lowered or treatment may need to be delayed or stopped to help keep the problem from getting worse.
Other side effects only happen with certain drugs. Ask your cancer care team about the possible side effects of the specific drugs you are getting. For example:
Neuropathy (nerve damage) is a common side effect of cisplatin, docetaxel, and paclitaxel which can lead to numbness, tingling, or even pain in the hands and feet. The nerve damage caused by cisplatin can also cause hearing loss. This may improve once treatment is stopped, but it can last a long time in some people. If you'll be getting any of the drugs mentioned here, talk with your doctor about the side effects before chemo starts, and let them know right away if you develop numbness and tingling sensations or other side effects.
Hand-foot syndrome can develop during treatment with capecitabine or 5-FU (when it is given as a continuous infusion). It can start out as redness in the hands and feet, and then might progress to pain and sensitivity in the palms and soles. If it worsens, skin may blister or peel, sometimes leading to painful sores. It’s important to tell your doctor right away about any early symptoms, such as redness or sensitivity, so that steps can be taken to keep things from getting worse.What is targeted drug therapy?
Targeted drug therapy is the use of medicines that target or are directed at proteins on cancer cells that help them grow, spread, and live longer. These drugs work to destroy cancer cells or slow their growth. Their side effects are different from chemotherapy (sometimes less severe) and many are taken as a pill.
Targeted drug therapy is used to treat many kinds of cancer, but this type of drug has not been well studied for treating most kinds of nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers since they are so rare. Some targeted drugs are used to treat melanomas in these areas. They can be used for nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers because of information from studies done in more common head and neck cancer types. 
Some targeted drugs, for example, monoclonal antibodies, work in more than one way to control cancer cells and may also be considered immunotherapy because they boost the immune system.
Drugs that target cancer cells with EGFR changes
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a protein that helps cancer cells grow. Drugs that target EGFR can be used to treat some advanced squamous cell cancers of the head and neck.
Cetuximab for nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancers
Cetuximab (Erbitux) is a monoclonal antibody, which is a man-made version of an immune system protein that targets EGFR, a protein on the surface of certain cells that helps them grow and divide. Nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancer cells often have more than normal amounts of EGFR. By blocking EGFR, cetuximab can slow or stop cancer cell growth.
Cetuximab may be used to treat more advanced cancers, such as those that have spread or come back after treatment. It may be combined with radiation and/or chemo drugs, such as cisplatin and 5-FU, or it may be used alone.
Cetuximab is given by infusion into a vein (IV), either once a week or every other week.
Possible side effects of drugs that target EGFR
The most common side effects of cetuximab are skin problems such as an acne-like rash on the face and chest during treatment, which in some cases can lead to infections. An antibiotic cream or ointment may be needed to help control the skin rash and related infections. Developing this rash might suggest the cancer is responding to treatment.
Other side effects might include headache, tiredness, fever, nausea, and diarrhea.
A rare but serious side effect of cetuximab is an allergic reaction during the infusion, especially the first infusion, which could cause serious breathing problems and low blood pressure. You'll be given medicine before treatment to help prevent this.
Talk to your cancer care team about the side effects to watch for and what can be done to help prevent or treat them.Immunotherapy is the use of medicines to help boost a person’s own immune system to find and destroy cancer cells more effectively. It typically works on specific proteins in the immune system to enhance the immune response. It has different (sometimes less severe) side effects than chemotherapy.
Some immunotherapy drugs, for example, monoclonal antibodies, work in more than one way to control cancer cells and may also be considered targeted drug therapy because they block a specific protein on the cancer cell to keep it from growing.
Immunotherapy is used to treat many kinds of cancer, but this type of drug has not been well studied for treating most kinds of nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers since they are so rare. Some immunotherapy drugs are used to treat melanomas in these areas. They are used for nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers based on information from studies done on more common head and neck cancer types.
Immune checkpoint inhibitors for nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancers
An important part of the immune system is its ability to keep itself from attacking normal cells in the body. To do this, it uses “checkpoint” proteins on immune cells that need to be turned on (or off) to start an immune response. Cancer cells sometimes use these checkpoints to avoid being attacked by the immune system.
Drugs that target these checkpoints (called checkpoint inhibitors) can be used to treat some people with nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancer.
PD-1 inhibitors
Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) and nivolumab (Opdivo) are drugs that target PD-1, a protein on T cells in the immune system. PD-1 normally helps keep these cells from attacking other cells in the body. By blocking PD-1, these drugs boost the immune response against cancer cells. This can shrink some tumors or slow their growth.
Pembrolizumab is commonly used first in people with certain types of nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer that has returned after treatment or that has spread to other parts of the body. It can be used either alone or in combination with chemotherapy drugs, unless the patient is not a candidate for immunotherapy. Both nivolumab and pembrolizumab can be used when chemotherapy stops working.
Pembrolizumab is also an option as the first treatment in some people.
These immunotherapy drugs are given as intravenous (IV) infusions, typically every 3, 4, or 6 weeks.
Possible side effects of immune checkpoint inhibitors
Side effects of these drugs can include feeling tired, cough, nausea, diarrhea, skin rash, loss of appetite, constipation, joint pain, and itching.
Other, more serious side effects occur less often:
Infusion reactions: Some people might have an infusion reaction while getting these drugs. This is like an allergic reaction, and can include fever, chills, flushing of the face, rash, itchy skin, feeling dizzy, wheezing, and trouble breathing. It’s important to tell your doctor or nurse right away if you have any of these symptoms while getting these drugs.
Autoimmune reactions: These drugs work by basically removing one of the safeguards on the body’s immune system. Sometimes the immune system starts attacking other normal parts of the body, which can cause serious or even life-threatening problems in the lungs, intestines, liver, hormone-making glands, kidneys, skin, or other organs.
It’s very important to report any new side effects during or after treatment with any of these drugs to your health care team right away. If serious side effects do occur, your treatment might be stopped and you will be given high doses of corticosteroids to suppress your immune system.Most of our information about nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancer is about ways to remove or to destroy cancer cells or to slow their growth. But it's important to remember that helping someone have a good quality of life is another important goal. This is true in all cases -- whether treatment is being used to try to cure the cancer or to slow down cancer growth when the cancer has spread to other parts of the body.
If the goal of treatment is a cure, supportive treatments can help ease symptoms related to cancer treatment side effects or the cancer itself. If the cancer is advanced, supportive treatment may play an even bigger role, helping to keep the person comfortable and maintain a good quality of life for as long as possible.
You might also hear supportive care referred to as palliative care, symptom management, or comfort care.
Pain: Pain is a significant concern for many patients with cancer. It can almost always be well controlled with milder drugs like ibuprofen or acetaminophen or, if needed, with stronger medicines like morphine or similar drugs (known as opioids). Taking these drugs does not mean a person will become addicted. Many studies have shown that people with cancer who take opioids for pain as their doctor directed typically do not become addicted.
Nutrition: Nutrition is another important concern for people with head and neck cancers such as nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancers. Both the cancer and its treatment may make it hard to swallow. If this affects how a person eats or drinks, they might need to have a feeding tube inserted into the stomach. This tube will most likely be needed for a short time during treatment, but in some cases it may need to be left in longer.
Narrowing of the nasal cavity: Sometimes, radiation can cause the nasal cavity to get smaller or cause the nasal cavity tissues to stick together. This might make it hard to breathe. Simple techniques like gently rotating a cotton swab covered with petroleum jelly in the nose or rinsing the inside of the nasal cavity with salt water might help open the tightened area a little and make breathing easier.
Lymphedema: Some people treated with radiation therapy might be at risk of developing lymphedema in the head and neck areas that were radiated. These areas can become swollen and firm. This can be worse if the person also had surgery. Sometimes, medicines, physical therapy, or massage therapy might be helpful.
There are many other ways your doctor can help maintain your quality of life and control your symptoms. But this means that you have to be honest with your doctor about how you are feeling and what symptoms you are having. Some people don’t like to tell their doctors they are not feeling well. But talking about it allows your doctor to treat and relieve the symptoms. Getting effective treatment can help you feel better.Most of the time, treatment of nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer is based on where it is and its stage (how far it has spread). But other factors, such as a person’s overall health and personal preferences, could also affect treatment options. Talk to your doctor if you have any questions about the treatment plan they recommend.
The staging of nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancer is very complex. At this time, staging systems have only created for the most common cancers – maxillary sinus and nasal cavity/ethmoid sinus cancers. Treatment choices for less common cancers of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses are tailored to each patient depending on the tumor type, size, location, and the patient’s general medical condition and wishes.
Because nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers are rare, they've been hard to study well. Most experts agree that treatment in a clinical trial should be considered for any type or stage of nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancer. That way people can get new treatments that are being studied.
What are treatment options for maxillary sinus cancer?
Stages 0, I, and II maxillary sinus cancer
The first step in treating most stage 0, I, or II maxillary sinus cancers is surgery to remove the cancer. In most cases, a maxillectomy (removal of bone and mucosa of the maxillary sinus) is done. Lymph nodes in the neck aren't removed.
Radiation might be needed after surgery for people with stage I and II cancers, if the cancer has features that make it more likely to come back, such as positive margins (cancer cells found at the edge of the removed tumor), or cancer growing into the area around the nerves (called perineural invasion).
Radiation is often recommended after surgery for adenoid cystic cancers, even if the margins are negative and there's no perineural invasion, because they have a high chance of coming back after treatment.
For some aggressive types of maxillary sinus tumors, such as undifferentiated cancer or esthesioneuroblastoma, chemotherapy might be recommended along with radiation treatment.
In cases where surgery to remove the cancer would be risky because of other medical problems, treatment may be radiation therapy alone or chemo given with the radiation.
Stages III and IV maxillary sinus cancer 
Stages III and IVA: People with stages III or IVA maxillary sinus cancer will have surgery to remove the tumor. If there are signs that the cancer has spread to the lymph nodes in the neck, these lymph nodes are removed as well. (This is called a neck dissection.)
After surgery, the area where the tumor had been removed is treated with radiation therapy. Sometimes the lymph nodes in the neck are also treated with radiation. This is more likely if the cancer has spread to a neck lymph node or if there are features that make it more likely the cancer will come back, such as a positive margin (cancer found at the edge of the removed tumor). Chemo may be given along with the radiation therapy. This has more side effects than getting either treatment alone, but it may help reduce the risk that the cancer will come back after treatment.
Stage IVB: Some cancers are stage IVB because the main tumor or the lymph nodes cannot be removed completely with surgery (are not resectable ). People with these cancers might be treated with radiation therapy alone, radiation with chemotherapy, or chemotherapy first then radiation, or chemotherapy first then chemo given with radiation. Radiation might also be given with targeted therapy. Surgery sometimes helps relieve sinus blockage, but it's not meant to cure or completely remove the cancer.
Stage IVB also includes some cancers where the main tumor and lymph nodes can be removed with surgery (is resectable). These cancers are treated like stage IVA cancers – surgery to remove the tumor and neck lymph nodes, followed by radiation and maybe chemo.
Stage IVC: These cancers have spread to organs beyond the head and neck, like the lungs or bones. The goal of treatment is usually to stop or slow the spread of the cancer for as long as possible and to help relieve any symptoms it may be causing.
Treatment for this stage varies, depending on where the cancer is, the problems it's causing, and a person’s general health. Chemo (or targeted therapy) is often the main form of treatment if a person can tolerate it because it reaches almost all parts of the body. Another option might be immunotherapy, either alone or along with chemo. Radiation therapy may be directed at areas of cancer that are causing problems. Because these cancers are very rare and hard to treat, clinical trials are a good option.
What are treatment options for nasal cavity cancer?
Stages 0, I, and II nasal cavity cancer
These cancers are in the nasal cavity but haven't spread to lymph nodes. They can be treated with surgery or radiation, but radiation after surgery is often recommended because there is a higher chance the cancer will come back if surgery or radiation alone is the only treatment.
Stages III and IV nasal cavity cancer
These cancers can be treated with surgery, and radiation is often given after surgery. If the cancer has spread to lymph nodes in the neck, these will be removed as well (called a neck dissection).
Another option is to treat with radiation, sometimes combined with chemo or targeted therapy.For some aggressive types of nasal cavity cancer or those that cannot be removed with surgery, chemotherapy first followed by chemotherapy plus radiation might be an option. More studies are being done to see if this approach is helpful.  
For more advanced cancers (those that have spread to other parts of the body), treatment options might include chemo, targeted therapy, immunotherapy, or some combination of these.
What are treatment options for ethmoid sinus cancer?
Because the ethmoid sinuses are close to the eye sockets and the skull base, operations for cancers in this area are often more difficult and more extensive than operations for maxillary sinus cancers.
Stages 0, I, and II ethmoid sinus cancer
These cancers are often treated first with surgery to remove the tumor. Surgery is typically followed by radiation therapy (sometimes with chemo), especially if the tumor has features that make it more likely to come back, such as positive margins (cancer cells found at the edge of the removed tissue) or perineural invasion (cancer cells found around a nerve). This may help lower the chance of the cancer coming back later.
For some very small cancers that are unlikely to spread, some doctors may recommend surgery only, but not all doctors agree with this.
Radiation therapy instead of surgery may also be an option for people with small tumors or people who are not healthy enough to have surgery.
For some aggressive types of ethmoid sinus tumors, such as undifferentiated cancer, chemotherapy may be recommended along with radiation treatment.
Stages III and IVA ethmoid sinus cancer
These cancers are often treated with surgery. If lymph nodes in the neck are enlarged, they will also be removed in an operation called a neck dissection. Surgery is typically followed by radiation therapy, sometimes along with chemo.
Another option may be to start treatment with radiation therapy given with chemotherapy. This might be followed by surgery if the tumor shrinks enough.
In some cases, chemotherapy might be given first, followed by radiation alone or radiation given along with more chemotherapy. In other cases, chemotherapy is given first, followed by surgery, then radiation (with or without chemo).
Stage IVB and IVC  ethmoid sinus cancers
Stage IVB: For tumors that cannot be removed with surgery (are unresectable) or for people who can't have or don’t want surgery, the first treatment is usually radiation therapy. Sometimes chemo is given with the radiation treatments. In some cases, if the person is healthy enough, chemotherapy can be given first then radiation or chemo with radiation. If someone is too weak for those treatment options, radiation alone or one chemotherapy drug might be tried.
Stage IVC: The goal of treatment for cancers that have spread to distant parts of the body, like the lungs or bones, is to stop or slow the growth of the cancer for as long as possible and to help relieve any symptoms it may be causing.
Treatment for this stage depends on where the cancer is, the problems it's causing, and a person’s general health. Chemo (and/or targeted therapy) is often the main treatment if a person can tolerate it because it reaches almost all parts of the body. Another option might be immunotherapy, either alone or along with chemo. Radiation therapy may be directed at areas of cancer that are causing problems. Because these cancers are hard to treat, clinical trials of newer treatments are a good option for some people.
What are treatment options for sphenoid sinus cancer?
The sphenoid sinuses are very difficult to reach with surgery. Cancers in this location are generally treated with radiation therapy. chemo, targeted therapy, and/or immunotherapy might be used as well.
What are treatment options for melanoma of the nasal cavity or paranasal sinus area?
Most melanomas of the nasal cavity or paranasal sinuses are treated with surgery to remove the tumor and a rim of normal tissue around it. Lymph nodes in the neck may also be removed in an operation called a neck dissection. Radiation therapy is often given after surgery.
For cancers that can’t be removed, radiation therapy, chemo, or other treatments (immunotherapy or targeted therapy) may be used. A melanoma that forms in the nasal cavity or a paranasal sinus is different in many ways from a melanoma skin cancer, but it's often treated the same way when it is advanced.
For more information about the treatment of advanced melanomas, see Melanoma Skin Cancer.
What are treatment options for sarcoma of the nasal cavity or paranasal sinus area?
Like other cancers of the nasal cavity and the paranasal sinuses, surgery is the main treatment for most types of sarcoma. In some cases radiation and/or chemo may also be used.
Rhabdomyosarcoma is a type of sarcoma that is most common among infants and young children. It's usually treated with a combination of surgery, radiation therapy, and chemo. For more information about the treatment of rhabdomyosarcoma, please see Rhabdomyosarcoma.
For other types of sarcoma, see Sarcoma: Adult Soft Tissue Cancer.
What are treatment options for recurrent nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer?
Cancer is called recurrent when it comes back after treatment. Recurrence can be local (in or near the same place the cancer first started), regional (in nearby lymph nodes), or distant (spread to distant organs such as the lungs). Options for treating recurrences depend on the location and type of cancer, as well as the treatment used the first time.
For a local recurrence, if radiation was the first treatment for the cancer, surgery may be used. If the first treatment was surgery without radiation, radiation therapy may be tried. Chemo and/or targeted therapy may be used with radiation, or it may be used by itself to treat recurrences that are not controlled by radiation therapy or surgery.
In a regional recurrence, the cancer comes back in the lymph nodes in the neck. This is often treated with surgery to remove many lymph nodes in the neck (a neck dissection) that are on the same side as the cancer. This may be followed with radiation to the neck, sometimes combined with chemo and/or targeted therapy.
Recurrent melanomas or sarcomas of the nasal cavity or paranasal sinuses are treated by surgery, if possible. Depending on the exact type of cells forming the cancers, chemo or other treatments may also be given.
When a nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer comes back in other organs, it's often treated with chemo, targeted therapy, and/or immunotherapy, although radiation could also be an option if it wasn’t given before.
Treatments for recurrent nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer may temporarily shrink cancers and help relieve symptoms. If further treatment is recommended, it’s important to talk to your doctor so that you understand what the goal of treatment is – whether it's to try to cure the cancer or to keep it under control for as long as possible and relieve symptoms. This can help you weigh the risks and benefits of each treatment.
Because these cancers are hard to treat, clinical trials of new treatments are a good option for some people.For some people with nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer, the end of treatment can be both stressful and exciting. You may be relieved to finish treatment, but it’s hard not to worry about cancer coming back (recurring). This is very common if you’ve had cancer.
For others , the cancer might never go away completely. Some people may still get regular treatments to try and control the cancer for as long as possible. Learning to live with cancer that does not go away can be difficult and very stressful. 
Ask your doctor for a survivorship care plan
Talk with your doctor about developing a survivorship care plan for you. This plan might include: 

A suggested schedule for follow-up exams and tests
A schedule for other tests you might need in the future, such as early detection (screening) tests for other types of cancer, or tests to look for long-term health effects from your cancer or its treatment
A list of possible late or long-term side effects from your treatment, including what to watch for and when you should contact your doctor
Recommendations for things you could do to improve your health and even possibly lower the chance for your cancer coming back, such as diet and physical activity suggestions
Reminders to keep your appointments with your primary care provider (PCP), who will monitor your general health care

Follow-up care after nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancer 
People with cancer of the nasal cavity or paranasal sinuses are at risk for the cancer coming back (a recurrence) and developing new cancers in other parts of the body, so they must be watched closely after treatment. Your cancer care team will discuss which tests should be done and how often based on the type and initial stage of your cancer, as well as the type of treatment you had, and your response to that treatment.
If you have completed treatment, you will probably have follow-up visits with your doctor for many years. It's very important to go to all your follow-up appointments with your doctor. During these visits, you will be asked if you are having any problems and might have exams, endoscopies, lab tests, or imaging tests to look for signs of the cancer returning, a new cancer, or treatment-related side effects.
Almost any cancer treatment can have side effects. Some might last for a few days or weeks, but others might last a long time. Some side effects might not even show up until years after you have finished treatment. Your doctor visits are a good time for you to ask questions and talk about any changes or problems you have noticed or concerns you have.
Don’t hesitate to report any new problems to your doctor right away. This might help your doctor find recurrent cancer as early as possible, when the cancer is small and easier to treat.
Doctor visits and tests
If there are no signs of cancer, many doctors will recommend you have a physical exam, endoscopy, and some of the other tests listed below every 3 to 6 months for the first couple of years after treatment, then every 6 to 12 months for the next few years. People who were treated for early-stage cancers may have doctor visits less often.
Imaging: Chest x-rays and other imaging tests might be used to watch for recurrence or a new tumor, especially if you have new symptoms.
Blood tests: If you were treated with radiation, it might have damaged your thyroid gland. You will most likely need regular blood tests to check your thyroid function.
Dental exams: People treated with radiation may also have problems with dry mouth and tooth decay, so regular dental exams are often recommended.
Speech, hearing, and swallowing rehabilitation: Both radiation and surgery can lead to problems with speech, swallowing, and hearing. These are often checked and treated by a speech therapist after treatment (see below). You might also need to see an audiologist (a specialist in hearing loss) for devices, like a hearing aid, to improve your hearing if the treatment changed it.
Nutrition follow-up: Cancers of the nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses and their treatments can sometimes cause problems such as trouble swallowing, dry mouth, or even loss of teeth. This can make it hard to eat, which can lead to weight loss and weakness from poor nutrition.
After treatment, you might not gain weight or replace your protein stores as well as you should. A team of doctors and nutritionists can work with you to provide nutrition supplements and information about your individual nutritional needs. This can help you maintain your weight and nutritional intake. Some may even need a feeding tube placed into the stomach for a short time after treatment.
Quitting smoking: If you had trouble quitting smoking before treatment, your doctor may recommend counseling as well as medication to help you. It is very important to quit smoking because people with even early-stage nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer are at risk of a new smoking-related cancer if they continue to smoke. See Stay Away from Tobacco and call 1-800-227-2345 for more information about quitting smoking.

Keeping health insurance and copies of your medical records
Even after treatment, it’s very important to keep health insurance. Tests and doctor visits cost a lot, and even though no one wants to think of their cancer coming back, this could happen.
At some point after your cancer treatment, you might find yourself seeing a new doctor who doesn’t know about your medical history. It’s important to keep copies of your medical records to give your new doctor the details of your diagnosis and treatment.
Can I lower my risk of the nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer progressing or coming back?
If you have (or have had) nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer, you probably want to know if there are things you can do that might lower your risk of the cancer growing or coming back, such as exercising, eating a certain type of diet, or taking nutritional supplements.
Quit smoking: Smoking during cancer treatment can reduce the benefit of treatment and increase the risk of cancer coming back (recurrence). Smoking after treatment can also increase the risk of getting a new smoking-related cancer (see Second Cancers below). Quitting smoking for good (before treatment starts, if possible) is the best way to improve your chances for survival. It is never too late to quit.
Adopting behaviors such as eating healthy food, getting regular physical activity, and staying at a healthy weight might help, but no one knows for sure. However, we do know that these types of lifestyle changes can have positive effects on your health that might help lower your risk of nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer or other cancers.
About dietary supplements
So far, no dietary supplements (including vitamins, minerals, and herbal products) have been shown to clearly help lower the risk of nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer cancer progressing or coming back. There might be supplements that will help, but it’s important to know that so far, none have been proven to do so.
In the United States, dietary supplements are not regulated like medicines – they don't have to be proven effective (or even safe) before being sold– although there are limits on what they’re allowed to claim they can do. If you’re thinking about taking any type of nutritional supplement, talk to your health care team. They can help you decide which ones you can use safely while avoiding those that might be harmful.
If the cancer comes back
If the cancer does recur, your treatment options will depend on the location of the cancer, what treatments you’ve had before, and your overall health. To learn more, see Treatment of Nasal Cavity and Paranasal Sinus Cancers, by Type and Stage.
For more general information, you may also want to see Understanding Recurrence.
Getting emotional support
Some feelings of depression, anxiety, or worry are normal when cancer is a part of your life. Some people are affected more than others. But everyone can benefit from help and support from other people, whether friends and family, religious groups, support groups, professional counselors, or others. Learn more in Life After Cancer.
Second cancers after treatment
People who’ve had nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer can still get other cancers. In fact, nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer survivors are at higher risk for getting some other types of cancer.
Cancer survivors can be affected by a number of health problems, but often a major concern is facing cancer again. Cancer that comes back after treatment is called a recurrence. But some cancer survivors may develop a new, unrelated cancer later. This is called a second cancer.
Survivors of nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancer can get any second cancer, but they have a higher risk of:

Cancers of the mouth and throat
Cancer of the larynx (voice box)
Cancer of the lung
Soft-tissue sarcoma

Most of these cancers are linked to tobacco use (such as smoking and chewing tobacco).
Staying healthy after treatment for nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancer
After completing treatment for cancer of the nasal cavity or paranasal sinus, you should still see your doctor regularly. Your doctor may order tests to look for signs that the cancer has come back or spread. These tests are also useful in finding some second cancers, particularly a new lung cancer or cancer of the mouth or throat. Experts don’t recommend any other tests to look for second cancers in patients who don’t have symptoms. Let your doctor know about any new symptoms or problems, because they could be caused by the cancer coming back or by a new disease or second cancer.
Survivors of nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancer should follow the American Cancer Society guidelines for the early detection of cancer and stay away from tobacco products. Smoking increases the risk of getting certain second cancers as well as other health problems.
To help maintain good health, survivors should also:

Get to and stay at a healthy weight
Keep physically active and limit the time you spend sitting or lying down
Follow a healthy eating pattern that includes plenty of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains, and limits or avoids red and processed meats, sugary drinks, and highly processed foods
Not drink alcohol. If you do drink, have no more than 1 drink per day for women or 2 per day for men

These steps might also lower the risk of some cancers and other health problems.
See Second Cancers in Adults to learn more.What are nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers?
Nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers start in the head and neck area. Cancer that starts in the nasal cavity (the opening behind the nose) is called nasal cavity cancer. Cancer that starts in the paranasal sinuses (air-filled spaces in the bones around the nose) is called paranasal sinus cancer. These cancers start when cells in the nasal cavity and paranasal sinus grow out of control and crowd out normal cells.
Cancer can start any place in the body. Cancer that starts in the nasal cavity or paranasal sinus area can spread to other parts of the body, such as the lungs or bones, and grow there. When cancer cells do this, it’s called metastasis and the cancer cells in the new place look just like the ones from where it started. When nasal cavity or paranasal sinus cancer spreads, it’s still called nasal cavity or parasinus sinus cancer. It’s not called lung cancer unless it starts from cells in the lung.
The information after the pictures below is about nasal cavity and paranasal sinus cancers.
Ask your doctor to use these pictures to show you where the cancer is.