Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (also known as non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, NHL, or sometimes just lymphoma) is a cancer that starts in white blood cells called lymphocytes, which are part of the body’s immune system.

NHL is a term that's used for many different types of lymphoma that all share some of the same traits. There is another main type of lymphoma, called Hodgkin lymphoma, which is treated differently. See Hodgkin Lymphoma.
NHL most often affects adults, but children can get it too. See Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma in Children.
NHL usually starts in lymph nodes or other lymph tissue, but it can sometimes affect the skin. See Lymphoma of the Skin.B-cell lymphomas make up most (about 85%) of the non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHL) in the United States. These types of lymphomas start in early forms of B lymphocytes (B cells). The most common types of B-cell lymphomas are listed below.T-cell lymphomas make up less than 15% of non-Hodgkin lymphomas in the United States. These lymphomas start in early forms of T lymphocytes (T cells). There are many types of T-cell lymphoma, but they are all fairly rare.Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is one of the most common cancers in the United States, accounting for about 4% of all cancers.
The American Cancer Society’s estimates for non-Hodgkin lymphoma in 2024 are:

About 80,620 people (44,590 males and 36,030 females) will be diagnosed with NHL. This includes both adults and children.
About 20,140 people will die from this cancer (11,780 males and 8,360 females).

Overall, the chance that a man will develop NHL in his lifetime is about 1 in 42; for a woman, the risk is about 1 in 52. But each person’s risk can be affected by a number of risk factors.
NHL can occur at any age. In fact, it is one of the more common cancers among children, teens, and young adults. Still, the risk of developing NHL increases throughout life, and more than half of people are 65 or older when they are first diagnosed.
Incidence rates have declined by about 1% per year for NHL since 2015. And from 2012 to 2021, the death rate decreased by 2% per year.Research into the causes, prevention, and treatment of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is being done in many medical centers throughout the world.A risk factor is anything that increases your chance of getting a disease like cancer. Different cancers have different risk factors. Some risk factors, like smoking, can be changed. Others, like a person’s age or family history, can’t.
But having a risk factor, or even many risk factors, does not mean that you will get the disease. And many people who get the disease may have few or no known risk factors.
Researchers have found several factors that can affect a person’s chance of getting non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). There are many types of lymphoma, and some of these factors have been linked only to certain types.Researchers have found that non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is linked with a number of risk factors, but the cause of most lymphomas is not known. This is complicated by the fact that there are many types of lymphomas are actually a diverse group of cancers, which might have different causes.There is no sure way to prevent non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). But there are some things you can do that might help lower your risk.
Most people with NHL have no risk factors that can be changed, so there is no way to protect against these lymphomas. But you may be able to lower your risk by limiting your risk of certain infections and doing what you can to maintain a healthy immune system.
Infection with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, is known to increase the risk of NHL, so one way to limit your risk is to avoid known risk factors for HIV, such as intravenous drug use or unprotected sex with many partners. You can read more about HIV infection in HIV Infection and Cancer.
Preventing the spread of the human T-cell lymphotropic virus (HTLV-1) could have a great impact on non-Hodgkin lymphoma in areas of the world where this virus is common, such as Japan and the Caribbean region. The virus is rare in the United States but seems to be increasing in some areas. The same strategies used to prevent HIV spread could also help control HTLV-1.
Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infection has been linked to some lymphomas of the stomach. Treating H. pylori infections with antibiotics and antacids may lower this risk, but the benefit of this strategy has not been proven yet. Most people with H. pylori infection have no symptoms, and some have only mild heartburn. More research is needed to find the best way to detect and treat this infection in people without symptoms.
Some lymphomas are caused by treatment of other cancers with radiation and chemotherapy or by the use of immune-suppressing drugs to avoid rejection of transplanted organs. Doctors are trying to find better ways to treat cancer and organ transplant patients without increasing the risk of lymphoma as much. But the benefits of these treatments still outweigh the small risk of developing lymphoma many years later.
Some studies have suggested that having excess body weight may increase your risk of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Staying at a healthy weight, keeping physically active, and following a healthy eating pattern that includes plenty of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains, and that limits or avoids red and processed meats, sugary drinks, and highly processed foods may help protect against lymphoma, but more research is needed to confirm this.At this time, there are no widely recommended screening tests for non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). (Screening tests or exams are used to look for a disease in people who have no symptoms.) Still, in some cases, lymphoma can be found early.
The best way to find lymphoma early is to pay attention to possible signs and symptoms.
One of the most common symptoms is enlargement of one or more lymph nodes, causing a lump or bump under the skin that is usually not painful. This is most often on the side of the neck, in the armpit, or in the groin region.
Other symptoms can include fever, chills, night sweats, weight loss, feeling tired, and swelling in the abdomen. Most often, these symptoms are caused by something other than lymphoma, but it’s important to have them checked by a doctor, especially if they don’t go away or get worse.
Careful, regular medical checkups are important for people with known risk factors for NHL (such as HIV infection, having an organ transplant or an autoimmune disease, or prior cancer treatment). These people do not often get lymphoma, but they and their doctors should be aware of possible symptoms and signs of lymphoma.Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) can cause different signs and symptoms, depending on the type of lymphoma and where it is in the body.If you have signs or symptoms that suggest you might have non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), exams and tests will be done to find out for sure.
If the results show lymphoma, more tests will be done to determine the exact type of lymphoma and to learn more about it, such as where it is in the body.After someone is diagnosed with non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), doctors will try to figure out if it has spread, and if so, how far. This process is called staging. The stage describes how much cancer is in the body. It helps determine how serious the lymphoma is and how best to treat it.Survival rates can give you an idea of what percentage of people with the same type and stage of cancer are still alive a certain amount of time (usually 5 years) after they were diagnosed. Survival rates can’t tell you how long you will live, but they may help give you a better understanding of how likely it is that your treatment will be successful.If you have non-Hodgkin lymphoma, it’s important to have honest, open discussions with your cancer care team. Feel free to ask any question, no matter how small it might seem. Here are some questions you might want to ask.Chemotherapy (chemo) is the use of anti-cancer drugs that are usually injected into a vein (IV) or taken by mouth. Chemo enters the bloodstream and reaches almost all areas of the body, making this treatment very useful for lymphoma.Immunotherapy is treatment that either boosts a person’s own immune system or uses man-made versions of the normal parts of the immune system to kill lymphoma cells or slow their growth.As researchers have learned more about the changes in lymphoma cells that help them grow, they have developed newer drugs to specifically target these changes. These targeted drugs work differently from standard chemotherapy (chemo) drugs. Sometimes they work when standard chemo drugs don’t, and they often have different types of side effects.Radiation therapy uses high-energy rays to kill cancer cells.Stem cell transplants are sometimes used to treat people with lymphoma that is in remission or that has relapsed during or after treatment.Surgery is often used to get a biopsy sample to diagnose and classify non-Hodgkin lymphoma, but it’s rarely used as a form of treatment.Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is generally divided into 2 main types, based on whether it starts in B lymphocytes (B cells) or T lymphocytes (T cells).
There are many different types of B-cell lymphomas. Treatment usually depends both on the type of lymphoma and the stage (extent) of the disease, but many other factors can be important as well.Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is generally divided into main 2 types, based on whether it starts in B lymphocytes (B cells) or T lymphocytes (T cells).
There are many different types of T-cell lymphomas, and treatment can vary based on which type you have.People with HIV infections are at increased risk for non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
Although people with HIV tend to get more aggressive forms of lymphoma, such as diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), primary CNS lymphoma, or Burkitt lymphoma, their outlook has improved a great deal in recent years. The use of highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART) to treat HIV has helped people better tolerate treatments such as chemotherapy (chemo) and immunotherapy.
A major problem in the past was that people with HIV infections tended to have low blood cell counts to begin with, which made it hard to treat them with full doses of chemo. This issue has been relieved somewhat by the use of HAART and the use of drugs to help the person’s body make new blood cells. Still, doctors give chemo cautiously and monitor blood counts closely.
Most experts believe that the prognosis (outlook) for a person with HIV-associated lymphoma relates at least as much to the HIV infection as to the lymphoma. Modern anti-HIV therapy can often control the immune deficiency in people with AIDS, so the outlook for people who develop lymphoma has improved.
The treatment of the lymphoma itself depends on the specific type of lymphoma. (For more on how specific types of non-Hodgkin lymphoma are treated, see Treating B-cell Non-Hodgkin Lymphomas.)For most people with non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), treatment of the lymphoma itself is the main concern. But people can also often benefit from care focused on helping with problems related to the NHL and its treatment. For example, some people with NHL have problems with infections or low blood counts. Although treating the NHL may help these problems over time, other treatments may be needed as well.For many people with non-Hodgkin lymphoma, treatment can destroy the lymphoma. Completing treatment can be both stressful and exciting. You may be relieved to finish treatment, but you might find it hard not to worry about the lymphoma coming back. (If cancer comes back after treatment, it is called recurrence.) If you’ve had cancer, it is very common to worry about this.
For some people, the lymphoma may never go away completely. These people may get regular treatments with chemo, radiation, or other therapies to help keep the lymphoma in check and to help relieve symptoms for as long as possible. Learning to live with lymphoma that doesn’t go away can be difficult and very stressful.What is non-Hodgkin lymphoma?
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) is a cancer that affects the body’s lymph system (also known as the lymphatic system). The lymph system is part of the immune system, which helps fight infections and some other diseases. It also helps fluids move through the body.
NHL can start any place in the body where lymph tissue is found, including the lymph nodes (small bean-shaped sacs throughout the body that help filter germs) and tonsils, and inside bones and certain organs.