Oral cavity cancer starts in the mouth. It might also be called oral cancer. Oropharyngeal cancer starts in the middle part of the throat just behind the oral cavity that can be seen when the mouth is open.
Cancer starts when cells in the body start to grow out of control. To learn more about how cancers start and spread, see What Is Cancer?
The oral cavity (mouth) and oropharynx (throat)
The oral cavity includes the lips, the inside lining of the lips and cheeks (buccal mucosa), the teeth, the gums, the front two-thirds of the tongue, the floor of the mouth below the tongue, the bony roof of the mouth (hard palate) and the area behind the wisdom teeth (called the retromolar trigone).
The oropharynx is the middle part of the throat just behind the oral cavity. It can be seen when your mouth is wide open. It includes the base of the tongue (the back third of the tongue), the soft palate (the back part of the roof of the mouth), the tonsils, and the side and back walls of the throat.
The oral cavity and oropharynx help you breathe, talk, eat, chew, and swallow. Minor salivary glands all over the oral cavity and oropharynx make saliva (spit) that keeps your mouth and throat moist and helps you digest food.
Ask your doctor to explain or show you where your cancer is. Explore the 3D interactive model here to learn more.The American Cancer Society’s most recent estimates for oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers in the United States are for 2024:

About 58,450 new cases of oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer
About 12,230 deaths from oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer

Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers occur most often in the following sites:

The tongue
The tonsils and oropharynx (the part of the throat behind the mouth)
The gums, floor of the mouth, and other parts of the mouth

The rest are found in the lips, the minor salivary glands (which often occur in the roof of the mouth), and other sites.
What is the average age of people who get oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer?
The average age of people diagnosed with these cancers is 64, but they can occur in young people. Just over 20% (1 in 5) of cases occur in people younger than 55.
How common is oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer?
These cancers are more than twice as common in men as in women. They are slightly more common in White people than Black people.
Overall, the lifetime risk of developing oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer is about 1 in 59 for men and 1 in 139 for women. These are average risks, but a number of factors (described in Oral Cavity and Oropharyngeal Cancer Risk Factors) can affect your risk for developing mouth and throat cancer.
Trends for oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer
Since the mid-2000s, incidence rates have increased by about 1% per year, mostly because of a rise in cancers linked with human papillomavirus (HPV) infection. These HPV-positive cancers tend to act differently than HPV-negative cancers. To learn more, see Risk Factors for Oral Cavity and Oropharyngeal Cancers and Causes of Oral Cavity and Oropharyngeal Cancers.
T﻿he death rate for cancers of the mouth and throat increased by 0.6% per year from 2009 through 2021, after decades of decline. This is mainly because of an increase in oropharyngeal cancer mortality of almost 2% per year during that time.
For statistics related to survival, see Oral Cavity and Oropharyngeal Cancer Survival Rates.
Visit the American Cancer Society’s Cancer Statistics Center for more key statistics.Research on oral and oropharyngeal cancers is being done in many university hospitals, medical centers, and other institutions worldwide. Each year, scientists find out more about what causes these diseases, how to prevent them, and how to better treat them.
Most experts agree that treatment in a clinical trial should be considered for any type or stage of cancer in the head and neck areas. This way people can get the best treatment available now and may also get the new treatments that are thought to be even better.
DNA changes in oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers
A great deal of research is being done to learn about the DNA changes that cause the cells in the oral cavity and oropharynx to become cancer.
In more than half  of all head and neck cancers, the cancer cells have changes (mutations) in the PIK3CA gene. This can cause cells to grow out of control, which can lead to cancer. Drugs that target the protein made by the abnormal PIK3CA gene, called PI3K are already approved to treat some other types of cancer. Studies are now being done to see if similar targeted therapy drugs will work in head and neck cancer, especially HPV-positive cancers, because they tend to have too many copies of the PIK3CA gene. 
One of the changes often found in DNA of oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer cells, especially HPV-negative cancer cells, is a mutation in the TP53 gene. The protein produced by this gene (called p53) normally helps keep cells from growing too much and helps to destroy cells that are too damaged to be fixed. Changes in the TP53 gene can lead to increased growth of abnormal cells and cancer.
Some studies suggest that tests to find these gene changes might help find oral and oropharyngeal cancers early. These tests may also be used to better find cancer cells that might have been left behind after surgery and to determine which tumors are most likely to respond to chemo or radiation therapy. The use of p53 gene therapy as a treatment for these cancers is also being studied in early-phase clinical trials.
Discoveries about how changes in the DNA of cells in the mouth and throat cause these cells to become cancer are also being applied to experimental treatments intended to reverse these changes. Another type of gene therapy boosts the immune system so it can better find and kill cancer cells. These forms of treatment are still in very early stages of study, so it will be several years before we know if any of them are effective.
Screening and early detection of oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers

Cancers of the head and neck can be hard to find early. And almost half of all oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers have already spread to the lymph nodes when they are first diagnosed. Given these issues, research is being done to find ways to detect these cancers more easily and hopefully sooner. For example, some researchers are testing the air people breathe out (exhale) for certain chemicals that seem to be linked with cancer of the head and neck area.
Looking for HPV infection has become a part of screening tests for cervical cancer over the years. Given the rise in HPV-positive head and neck cancers, especially in the oropharynx, some studies are looking at ways to screen for HPV infection in the oral cavity and oropharynx. However, there are currently no tests approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for this. Other studies are checking to see if blood tests might identify people infected with the high-risk types of HPV, and if this is something that can be used to screen for HPV-positive oropharyngeal cancer. This might help prevent or catch these cancers early.
Researchers are also developing other types of tests to help find these cancers early. For example, in one test that can be done at home (known as CancerDetect), you collect a sample of saliva and mail it to a lab. The cells in the sample are then tested for genetic changes that are linked to cancer. While this test is available for purchase, it is not part of the screening recommendations from expert groups at this time. More research will be needed to show how well it works before it can be approved by the FDA.
Treatment of oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers
Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers that are linked with HPV tend to have a better outcome than those that are HPV-negative. Clinical trials are starting to look at these HPV-positive and HPV-negative cancers separately. For instance, studies are being done to see if HPV-positive cancers can be treated with less chemotherapy and/or radiation without reducing survival. Researchers are also working on treatments aimed at HPV infections or that target HPV-infected cancer cells. Studies are also looking for better ways to treat HPV-negative cancers, too, as well as the best ways to use the treatments we already have.
A great deal of research is focused on improving results from chemotherapy (chemo) for people with these cancers. This includes figuring out which combinations of drugs work best and determining how best to use these drugs along with other forms of treatment. Researchers also continue to develop new chemo drugs that might be more effective against advanced oral and oropharyngeal cancers. They're also looking at whether drugs approved to treat other types of cancer might work for these cancers.
Doctors are always looking at newer ways of focusing radiation on tumors more precisely to help them get more radiation to the tumor while limiting side effects to nearby areas. This is especially important for head and neck tumors like oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers, where there are often many important structures very close to the tumor.
Clinical trials are studying targeted drug therapies that might block the action of substances (such as growth factors and growth factor receptors) that cause head and neck cancers to grow and spread. Some targeted drugs are being studied that block the ability of the cancer cell to keep growing and help chemoradiation work better.A risk factor is anything that increases a person’s chance of getting a disease such as cancer. Different cancers have different risk factors. Some risk factors, like smoking, can be changed. Others, like a person’s age or family history, can’t be changed.
But risk factors don't tell us everything. Having a risk factor, or even many, does not mean that a person will get the disease. And many people who get the disease have few or no known risk factors.
Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers are often grouped with other cancers in the head and neck area. These cancers often have many of the same risk factors listed below.
Tobacco and alcohol use
Tobacco use is one of the strongest risk factors for head and neck cancers, including oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer. The risk for these cancers is much higher in people who smoke than in people who don't. Most people with these cancers have a history of smoking or other tobacco exposure, like chewing tobacco. The more you smoke, the greater your risk. Smoke from cigarettes, pipes, and cigars all increase your risk of getting these cancers. Some studies have also found that long-term exposure to secondhand smoke might increase the risk of these cancers, but more research is needed to confirm this. Pipe smoking is linked to a very high risk for cancer in the part of the lips that touch the pipe stem.
Oral tobacco products (snuff, dip, spit, chew, or dissolvable tobacco) are linked with cancers of the cheek, gums, and inner surface of the lips. Using oral tobacco products for a long time is linked to a very high risk. These products also cause gum disease, destruction of the bone sockets around teeth, and tooth loss.
When diagnosed with oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer, it's important for people who smoke or use oral tobacco, to quit smoking and quit all oral tobacco products. People who continue to smoke while getting cancer treatment can have trouble with wound healing, more side effects from radiation therapy or chemotherapy, a higher risk of infection, and worse outcomes. Also, continuing to smoke and use oral tobacco products after cancer treatment, greatly increases the risk of developing a second cancer in the mouth, throat, larynx (voice box), lung and other organs.
If you are thinking about quitting tobacco and need help, call the American Cancer Society at 1-800-227-2345. A tobacco cessation and counseling program can help increase your chances of quitting for good. See How to Quit Smoking or Smokeless Tobacco for more information.
Drinking alcohol increases the risk of developing oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers. Heavy drinkers have a higher risk than light drinkers.
Smoking and drinking alcohol together multiplies the risk of these cancers. The risk of these cancers in people who drink and smoke heavily is about 30 times higher than the risk in people who don’t smoke or drink.
Betel quid and gutka
In Southeast Asia, South Asia, and certain other areas of the world, many people chew betel quid, which is made up of areca nut (betel nut), spices, lime, and other ingredients. Many people in these areas also chew gutka, a mixture of betel quid and tobacco. People who chew betel quid or gutka have an increased risk of cancer of the mouth.
Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection
Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a group of more than 150 types of viruses. They're called papillomaviruses because some of them cause a type of growth commonly called a papilloma or wart.
Infection with certain types of HPV can cause some forms of cancer, including cancers of the penis, cervix, vulva, vagina, anus, mouth, and throat. HPV type 16 (HPV16) is the type most often linked to cancer of the oropharynx, especially those in the tonsil and base of tongue. HPV DNA (a sign of HPV infection) is found in about 2 out of 3 oropharyngeal cancers and in a much smaller portion of oral cavity cancers.
The number of oropharyngeal cancers linked to HPV has risen greatly over the past few decades. These cancers are becoming more common in younger people who have a history of multiple sex partners (including oral sex) and no history of alcohol abuse or tobacco use. Oropharyngeal cancers linked to HPV infection tend to have better outcomes (prognoses) than tumors not caused by HPV because chemotherapy and radiation treatments work better for these cancers. This improvement in outcome however is not seen in people with HPV-related oropharyngeal cancers who also smoke.  
See HPV (human papillomavirus) to learn more about HPV and vaccines to prevent HPV infection.
Sex
Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers are twice as common in men than in women. This might be because men have been more likely to use tobacco and alcohol in the past. HPV-related oropharyngeal cancers are also seen more often in men.
Excess body weight
Having too much body weight appears to increase the risk of cancers of the oropharynx and larynx.  Eating more plant-based foods, such as nonstarchy vegetables and whole fruit, might help people lose weight as well as reduce their risk of oropharyngeal and laryngeal cancer from poor nutrition.
Age
Cancers of the oral cavity and oropharynx usually take many years to develop, so they're not common in young people. Most patients with these cancers are older than 55 when the cancers are first found. HPV-linked cancers tend to be diagnosed in people younger than 50.
Ultraviolet (UV) light
Sunlight is the main source of UV light for most people. Cancers of the lip are more common in people who have outdoor jobs where they are exposed to sunlight for long periods of time.
Poor nutrition
Several studies have found that a diet low in fruits and vegetables is linked with an increased risk of cancers of the oral cavity and oropharynx.
Genetic syndromes
People with syndromes caused by inherited defects (mutations) in certain genes have a very high risk of mouth and middle throat cancer.

Fanconi anemia: People with this syndrome often have blood problems at an early age, which may lead to leukemia or myelodysplastic syndrome. They also have a very high risk of cancers of the mouth and throat.
Dyskeratosis congenita: This is a genetic syndrome that can cause aplastic anemia, skin rashes, and abnormal fingernails and toenails. People with this syndrome also have a very high risk of developing head and neck cancers, especially of the mouth and throat, at a young age.

Unproven or controversial risk factors
Mouthwash
Some studies have suggested that mouthwash with a high alcohol content might be linked to a higher risk of oral and oropharyngeal cancers. But recent research has questioned these results. Studying this possible link is complicated by the fact that people who smoke and frequent drinkers (who already have an increased risk of these cancers) are more likely to use mouthwash than people who neither smoke nor drink.
Irritation from dentures
It's been suggested that long-term irritation of the lining of the mouth caused by poorly fitting dentures is a risk factor for oral cancer. But many studies have found no increased risk in denture wearers overall.
Poorly fitting dentures can tend to trap agents that have been proven to cause oral cancer, such as alcohol and tobacco particles, so denture wearers should have them checked by a dentist regularly to ensure a good fit. All denture wearers should remove their dentures at night and clean and rinse them thoroughly every day.
Oral health
Studies have suggested the overall health of the mouth, teeth, and gums may impact oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer risk because of changes in the normal bacteria in the mouth. Poor oral hygiene, which can lead to tooth loss, may also be linked to these cancers. Overall survival may also be affected. More research is needed, but regular dental visits, as well as brushing and flossing, may lessen these risks and have many other health benefits, too.Doctors and scientists can’t say for sure what causes each case of oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer. But they do know many of the risk factors and how some of them may lead to cells becoming cancer.
For human cells to be made, this mostly depends on the information in the cells’ DNA. DNA is the chemical in our cells that makes up our genes, which control how our cells work. We look like our parents because they are the source of our DNA. But DNA affects more than just how we look.
Some genes control when cells grow, divide, and die: 

Genes that help cells normally grow, divide, and stay alive are called proto-oncogenes. When a proto-oncogene mutates (changes), the gene becomes abnormal and is then called an oncogene.  
Genes that help keep cell growth under control or make cells die at the right time are called tumor suppressor genes.

Cancers can be caused by DNA mutations (gene changes) that turn on oncogenes or turn off tumor suppressor genes. This leads to cells growing out of control. Changes in many different genes are usually needed to cause oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer.
For more about how genes changes can lead to cancer, see Genes and Cancer.
Tobacco and alcohol and oral or oropharyngeal cancers
Scientists believe that some risk factors, such as tobacco or heavy alcohol use, may cause these cancers by damaging the DNA of cells that line the inside of the mouth and throat.
When tobacco and alcohol damage the cells lining the mouth and throat, the cells in this layer need to divide more often and make more copies of themselves. This increases the chance to make mistakes when copying their DNA, which may increase the possibility of becoming cancer.
Many of the chemicals found in tobacco can damage DNA directly. Scientists are not sure whether alcohol directly damages DNA, but they have shown that alcohol helps many DNA-damaging chemicals get into cells more easily. This may be why the combination of tobacco and alcohol damages DNA far more than tobacco alone. Acetaldehyde, a breakdown product of alcohol, is found in saliva (spit). It has been shown to get in the way of normal DNA repair, as well as disturb other functions of DNA. The level of acetaldehyde goes up as people drink more alcohol which may be one way alcohol damages the cells lining the oral cavity.
This damage can cause certain genes (for example, those in charge of starting or stopping cell growth) to not work well. Abnormal cells can begin to grow out of control, forming a tumor.
Human papillomavirus (HPV) and oral or oropharyngeal cancers
Certain types of human papillomavirus (HPV) infections (mainly HPV16), are important causes of most oropharyngeal (middle throat) cancers. HPV makes 2 proteins known as E6 and E7 which turn off some tumor suppressor genes, such as Rb and p53. In the throat, too much of the E6 and E7 proteins are made. This may allow the cells lining the oropharynx to grow out of control and to develop changes in more genes, which in some cases can lead to cancer.
The number of oropharyngeal cancers caused by HPV infections is going up. They tend to be found in younger people who don’t smoke or drink alcohol, and tend to have a better outcome (prognosis) than throat cancers that are not caused by HPV.
Inherited or acquired gene mutations and oral or oropharyngeal cancers
Some people inherit DNA mutations (changes) from their parents that increase their risk for developing certain cancers. But inherited gene mutations are not believed to cause very many cancers of the oral cavity or oropharynx. Even though inherited gene mutations rarely cause these cancers, some people seem to inherit a poor ability to detoxify (break down) certain types of cancer-causing chemicals. These people are more sensitive to the cancer-causing effects of tobacco smoke, alcohol, and certain industrial chemicals. 
Acquired gene mutations are gene changes that usually happen during life, rather than being inherited. These gene mutations often result from exposure to cancer-causing chemicals, like those found in tobacco smoke. Several different gene changes are probably needed for cancer to develop, and not all of these changes are understood at this time.Not all cases of oral cavity (mouth) and oropharyngeal (middle throat) cancer can be prevented, but the risk of developing these cancers can be greatly reduced if you take steps to avoid certain risk factors.
Avoid tobacco and alcohol
Use of tobacco and alcohol are among the most important risk factors for these cancers. Not starting to smoke or use oral tobacco products is the best way to limit the risk of getting these cancers. Quitting tobacco also greatly lowers your risk of developing these cancers, even after many years of use. Heavy alcohol use is a risk factor on its own. It also greatly increases the cancer-causing effect of tobacco. So it's especially important to avoid smoking and alcohol as well as the combination of alcohol and smoking.
Avoid HPV infection/Get the HPV vaccine
The risk of human papillomavirus (HPV) infection of the mouth and middle throat is increased in those who have oral sex and multiple sex partners. These infections are also more common in people who smoke, which may be because the smoke damages their immune system or the cells that line the mouth and throat.
HPV is very common and rarely causes symptoms. And even though HPV infection is linked to most cases of oropharyngeal cancer, most people with HPV infections of the mouth and throat do not go on to develop this cancer.
Vaccines that reduce the risk of infection with certain types of HPV are available. These vaccines were originally meant to lower the risk of cervical cancer, but they have been shown to lower the risk of other cancers linked to HPV, such as cancers of the penis, anus, vulva, vagina, and mouth and throat.
Since these vaccines are most effective if given before someone is infected with HPV, they're recommended to be given when a person is young, before they're likely to become sexually active. But certain adults can also get the HPV vaccine.
See HPV to learn more.
Limit exposure to ultraviolet (UV) light
Ultraviolet radiation is an important and avoidable risk factor for cancer of the lips, as well as for skin cancer. If possible, limit the time you spend outdoors during the middle of the day, when the sun’s UV rays are strongest. If you are out in the sun, wear a wide-brimmed hat and use sunscreen and lip balm with a sun protection factor (SPF) of at least 30.
Maintain a healthy weight and eating pattern
Poor nutrition and excess body weight have been linked to oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers. Following a healthy eating pattern with more plant-based foods, such as non-starchy vegetables and whole fruit may help lower your risk of these cancers (and many others). 
The American Cancer Society recommends following a healthy eating pattern that includes plenty of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains, and that limits or avoids red and processed meats, sugary drinks, and highly processed foods. In general, eating a healthy diet is much better than adding vitamin supplements to an otherwise unhealthy diet. See the American Cancer Society Guidelines for Diet and Physical Activity for Cancer Prevention for our full guidelines.
Get regular dental checkups
Areas of leukoplakia or erythroplakia (pre-cancer growths) in the mouth sometimes turn into cancer. Doctors often remove these areas, especially if a biopsy shows they contain areas of dysplasia (abnormal growth) when looked at closely in the lab.
But removing areas of leukoplakia or erythroplakia doesn't always keep someone from getting oral cavity cancer. Studies have found that even when these areas are completely removed, people with certain types of erythroplakia and leukoplakia still have a higher chance of developing a cancer in some other area of their mouth. This may be because the whole lining of the mouth has probably been exposed to the same cancer-causing agents that led to these pre-cancers (like tobacco). This means that the entire area may already have early changes that can lead to cancer.
It's important for people who have had these areas removed to continue having check-ups to look for cancer and new areas of leukoplakia or erythroplakia.
If you wear dentures, make sure they fit properly. Avoiding sources of oral irritation (such as dentures that don’t fit properly) may help lower your risk for oral cancer.Exams of the mouth and finding oral cancer early
There's no routine screening test or program for oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers. Still, many pre-cancers and cancers in these areas can be found early (when they're small) during routine oral exams by a dentist, doctor, dental hygienist, or by self-exam.
Some dentists and doctors recommend that you look at your mouth in a mirror every month to check for any changes, like white patches (leukoplakia), sores, or lumps. This is very important if you use or have used tobacco, and/or if you routinely drink alcohol, as these put you at much higher risk for these cancers.
Regular dental check-ups that include an exam of the entire mouth are important in finding oral and oropharyngeal cancers (and pre-cancers) early.
Along with a clinical exam of the mouth and throat, some dentists and doctors may use special dyes and/or lights to look for abnormal areas, especially if you are at higher risk for these cancers. If an abnormal area is spotted, tests might also be used to help decide if they might be cancer (and need to be biopsied) or to choose the best spot to take tissue from for a biopsy. (See Tests for Oral Cavity and Oropharyngeal Cancers) Here are some of the tests used most often:

One method uses a dye called toluidine blue. If the dye is spread over an abnormal area, it will turn a darker blue than the areas around it.
Another method uses fluorescent light. When the light is reflected off abnormal tissue, it looks different from the light reflected off normal tissue.


If an abnormal area is found, sometimes it can be tested by exfoliative cytology. To do this, the abnormal area is scraped with a stiff brush (brush biopsy). The cells from the scraping are sent to a lab where they are checked to see if there are pre-cancer or cancer cells.

And even though HPV is a risk factor for oropharyngeal cancers, there is no approved test to screen for HPV in the throat like there is for cervical cancer.Oral cavity (mouth) and oropharyngeal (throat) cancers might cause one or more of these signs or symptoms:

A sore on the lip or in the mouth that doesn't heal
Pain in the mouth that doesn’t go away
A lump or thickening in the lips, mouth, or cheek
A white or red patch on the gums, tongue, tonsil, or lining of the mouth
A sore throat or a feeling that something is caught in your throat that doesn’t go away
Trouble chewing or swallowing
Trouble moving the jaw or tongue
Numbness of the tongue, lip, or other area of the mouth
Swelling or pain in the jaw
Dentures that start to fit poorly or become uncomfortable
Loosening of the teeth or pain around the teeth
Voice changes
A lump or mass in the neck or back of the throat
Weight loss
Pain in the ear

Many of these signs and symptoms can also be caused by diseases other than cancer, or even by other cancers. Still, it's very important to see a doctor or dentist if any of these conditions last more than 2 weeks so that the cause can be found and treated, if needed.A doctor or dentist may find some oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers or pre-cancers during a routine exam, but many of these cancers are found because the person has noticed a sign or symptom and brought it to their attention. Then, if cancer is suspected, other tests will be needed.
Tests to find oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer
The doctor will ask you about symptoms, possible risk factors, and any other medical problems you may have.
The doctor will look for possible signs of mouth or throat cancer or pre-cancer. These could be bumps or other changed areas on your head, face or neck, or problems with the nerves of the face and mouth. The doctor will look at the entire inside of your mouth, and might feel around in it with a gloved finger. Other tests might be used to look for abnormal areas in your mouth or throat. Some of these tests are described in Can Oral Cavity and Oropharyngeal Cancers Be Found Early?
Complete head and neck exam
If there is a reason to think you might have cancer, your doctor will refer you to a specialist. These specialists are oral and maxillofacial surgeons or head and neck surgeons. They are also known as ear, nose, and throat (ENT) doctors or otolaryngologists. The specialist will most likely do a complete head and neck exam, as well as order other exams and tests.
The specialist will pay special attention to the head and neck area, being sure to look and feel for any abnormal areas. This exam will include the lymph nodes in your neck, which will be felt carefully for any swelling.
Because the oropharynx is deep inside the neck, some parts are not easy to see. The doctor may use mirrors or special fiber-optic scopes to look at these areas. Both of these exams can be done in the doctor’s office. The doctor may first spray the back of your throat with numbing medicine to help make the exam easier.

Indirect pharyngoscopy and laryngoscopy: Small mirrors on long, thin handles are used to look at your throat, the base of your tongue, and part of the larynx (voice box).
Direct (flexible) pharyngoscopy and laryngoscopy: A flexible fiber-optic scope (called an endoscope) is put in through your mouth or nose to look at areas that can’t easily be seen with mirrors. It can get a clearer look at areas of change that were seen with the mirrors and also the part behind the nose (nasopharynx) and the larynx (voice box).

Panendoscopy
Since tobacco and alcohol use are risk factors for oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers, as well as cancers of the esophagus and lung, there is a chance (up to 10%) of finding more than one cancer at the same time. To make sure there are no other cancers in the esophagus or lung, a panendoscopy might be done. This procedure is also helpful if it is unclear where the cancer started or if the lymph nodes in the bottom part of the neck seem abnormal.
During a panendoscopy, the doctor uses different types of endoscopes passed down the mouth or nose to do a laryngoscopy/pharyngoscopy, esophagoscopy, and (at times) bronchoscopy. This lets the doctor thoroughly examine the oral cavity, oropharynx, larynx (voice box), esophagus (tube leading to the stomach), and the trachea (windpipe) and bronchi (breathing passages in the lungs).
This exam is usually done in an operating room while you are asleep under general anesthesia. The doctor uses a laryngoscope to look for tumors in the throat and voice box. Other parts of your mouth, nose, and throat are examined, too. The doctor might also use an esophagoscope to look into the esophagus or a bronchoscope to look into the trachea (windpipe) and bronchi.
Your doctor will look at these areas through the scopes to find any tumors, see how big they are, and see how far they might have spread to nearby areas. A small piece of tissue from any tumors or other abnormal areas might be taken out to be looked at closely (biopsied) to see if they contain cancer. Biopsies can be done with special tools that are used through the scopes.
Biopsy
In a biopsy, the doctor removes a small piece of tissue or a sample of cells, so it can be looked at closely in the lab for cancer cells. A biopsy is the only way to know for sure that oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer is present. A sample of tissue or cells is always needed to confirm a cancer diagnosis before treatment is started. Several types of biopsies may be used, depending on each case.
Exfoliative cytology
For exfoliative cytology, the doctor scrapes the changed area and smears the collected tissue onto a glass slide. The sample is then stained with a dye so the cells can be seen clearly. If any of the cells look abnormal, the area can then be biopsied.
The advantage of this test is that it's easy to do and causes very little pain. This can lead to an earlier diagnosis and a greater chance of treatment being successful if cancer is found. But this method doesn't show all cancers. And sometimes it’s not possible to tell the difference between cancer cells and abnormal cells that aren't cancer (such as dysplasia), so a different type of biopsy would still be needed.
Incisional biopsy
For an incisional biopsy, a small piece of tissue is cut from the area that looks abnormal. This is the most common type of biopsy used to check changes in the mouth or throat.
The biopsy can be done either in the doctor’s office or in the operating room, depending on where the tumor is and how easy it is to get a good tissue sample. If it can be done in the doctor’s office, the area around the tumor will be numbed before the biopsy is done. If the tumor is deep inside the mouth or throat, the biopsy might be done in the operating room while you are in a deep sleep under general anesthesia.
Fine needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy
For a fine needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy, a very thin, hollow needle attached to a syringe pulls out (aspirates) some cells from a tumor or lump. These cells are then looked at closely in the lab to see if cancer is present.
FNA biopsy is not used to sample abnormal areas in the mouth or throat, but it's sometimes used for a neck lump (mass) that can be felt or seen on a CT scan. FNA can be helpful in some situations, such as:
Finding the cause of a new neck mass: An FNA biopsy is sometimes used as the first test for someone with a newly found lump in the neck. It may show that the lump is a benign (not cancer) lymph node that has grown because of a nearby infection, such as a sinus or tooth infection. In this case, treatment of the infection is all that's needed. Or the FNA may find a benign, fluid-filled cyst that can be cured by surgery. But even when the FNA results are benign, if other symptoms suggest cancer, more tests (such as pharyngoscopy and panendoscopy) are needed.
If the FNA sample has cancer cells, the doctor looking at the biopsy sample can usually tell what type of cancer it is. If the cells look like a squamous cell cancer, more exams will be done to search for the source of the cancer in the mouth and throat. If the FNA shows a different type of cancer, such as lymphoma or a cancer that has spread to a lymph node in the neck from another organ (like the thyroid or lungs) more tests will be done to find it, and treatment for that type of cancer will be given.
Learning how far a diagnosed cancer has spread: FNA also might be done after oral or oropharyngeal cancer has been diagnosed to find out if the cancer has spread to lymph nodes in the neck. This information will help the doctor decide the best treatment for the cancer.
Seeing if cancer has come back after treatment: FNA might be used for people whose cancer has been treated by surgery and/or radiation therapy, to find out if a new neck mass in the treated area is scar tissue or cancer that has come back.
Lab tests of biopsy samples
All biopsy samples are sent to a lab to be checked closely by a pathologist, a doctor who is specially trained to diagnose cancer from a biopsy. The doctor can usually tell cancer cells from normal cells, as well as what type of cancer it is, by the way the cells look. In some cases, the doctor may need to test the cells with special stains to help find out what type of cancer it is.
HPV (p16) testing
For cancers of the throat, the biopsy samples are often tested (for the p16 protein) to see if HPV infection is present. This is a key part of staging (finding out if and how much the cancer has spread) and is considered when making treatment decisions for oropharyngeal cancer. This information can also help the doctor predict the probable course of the cancer, because people whose cancers are linked to HPV tend to do better than those whose cancers are not.
Imaging tests
Imaging tests are not used to diagnose oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancers, but they may be done for a number of reasons before and after a cancer diagnosis, including:

To look at a suspicious area that might be cancer
To learn how far cancer might have spread
To help find out if treatment is working
To look for signs that the cancer has come back (recurred) after treatment

Chest x-ray
An x-ray of your chest might be done after oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer has been diagnosed to see if the cancer has spread to the lungs. More often though, a CT scan or PET/CT scan of the lungs is done since they tend to give more detailed pictures.
Computed tomography (CT or CAT scan)
A CT scan uses x-rays to make detailed, cross-sectional images of your body. It can help your doctor see the size and location of a tumor, if it's growing into nearby tissues, if it has spread to lymph nodes in the neck, or to the lungs or other distant organs.
CT-guided needle biopsy: If a lung biopsy is needed to check for cancer spread, this test can also be used to guide a biopsy needle into the mass (lump) to get a tissue sample to check for cancer.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
Like CT scans, MRI scans show detailed images of soft tissues in the body. But MRI scans use radio waves and strong magnets instead of x-rays. A contrast material called gadolinium may be injected into a vein before the scan to get clear pictures. An MRI scan may be done for oral cavity cancer if there are a lot of dental fillings that might distort the CT pictures or to look closely if the cancer is growing into the bone marrow.
Positron emission tomography (PET)
For a PET scan, a slightly radioactive form of sugar (known as FDG) is injected into the blood and collects mainly in cancer cells.
PET/CT scan: Often a PET scan is combined with a CT scan using a special machine that can do both scans at the same time. This lets the doctor compare areas of higher radioactivity on the PET with the more detailed picture on the CT scan.
PET/CT scans can be useful:

If your doctor thinks the cancer might have spread but doesn’t know where. They can show spread of cancer to the liver, bones, and some other organs.
In follow up of patients after oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer treatment.

Bone scan
For a bone scan, a small amount of low-level radioactive material is injected into the blood and collects mainly in abnormal areas of bone. A bone scan can help show if a cancer has spread to the bones. But this test isn’t needed very often because PET scans can usually show if cancer has spread to the bones.
Barium swallow
A barium swallow can be used to see the lining of the upper part of the digestive system, especially the esophagus (the tube that connects the throat to the stomach). In this test, you drink a chalky liquid called barium which coats the walls of your throat and esophagus. A series of x-rays is taken as you swallow. Your doctor may order this test because people with oral and oropharyngeal cancers are at risk for cancer of the esophagus. It's also useful to see if the cancer is causing problems with swallowing.
Ultrasound
An ultrasound uses sound waves and their echoes to create images of the inside of the body. A small microphone-like instrument called a transducer gives off sound waves and picks up the echoes as they bounce off organs. The echoes are converted by a computer into an image on a screen.
Neck ultrasound: For this exam, a technician moves the transducer along the skin over your neck. This type of ultrasound can be used to look for lymph nodes in the neck to see if they are swollen or if they look abnormal inside which could be signs of cancer. The ultrasound can help guide a needle into the abnormal lymph node for an FNA biopsy. It might also be used after treatment to look for signs of cancer coming back (recurrence).
Quit smoking before oral cavity or oropharyngeal treatment
It is very important to quit smoking before any treatment for oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer. If you used to smoke cigarettes before being diagnosed, it is important to not start during treatment. Smoking during treatment can cause:

Poor wound healing, especially after surgery
More side effects from chemo
Radiation to not work as well
A higher chance of getting an infection
Longer stays in the hospital
A greater chance of dying. 

Pre-treatment tests for oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer
Other tests might be done as part of a work-up if a patient has been diagnosed with oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer. These tests are not used to diagnose the cancer, but they may be done for other reasons, such as to see if a person is healthy enough for treatments such as surgery, radiation therapy, or chemotherapy.
Blood tests
No blood test can diagnose cancer in the oral cavity or oropharynx. Still, your doctor may order routine blood tests to get an idea of your overall health, especially before treatment. Such tests can help diagnose poor nutrition and low blood cell counts. A complete blood count (CBC) looks at whether your blood has normal amounts of different types of blood cells. For example, it can show if you are anemic (have a low number of red blood cells). Blood chemistry tests can help determine how well your liver or kidneys are working. 
Function tests before surgery
If surgery is planned, you might also have an electrocardiogram (EKG) to make sure your heart is working well. Some people having surgery also may need breathing tests, called pulmonary (lung) function tests.
Dental exam before radiation treatment
If radiation therapy will be part of the treatment, you'll be asked to see a dentist before starting. The dentist will help with routine dental care and may remove any bad teeth, if needed, before radiation treatment is started. Radiation can damage the saliva (spit) glands and cause dry mouth. This can increase the chance of cavities, infection, and breakdown of the jawbone.
If the cancer is in your jaw or the roof of your mouth, a dentist with special training (called a prosthodontist) might be asked to evaluate you. This dentist can make replacements for missing teeth or other structures of the oral cavity to help restore your appearance; comfort; and ability to chew, swallow, and speak after treatment. If part of the jaw or roof of the mouth (palate) will be removed with the tumor, the prosthodontist will work to ensure that the replacement artificial teeth and the remaining natural teeth fit together correctly. This can be done with dentures, other types of prostheses, or dental implants.
Hearing tests
Cisplatin, the main chemotherapy drug used in treating oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer can cause hearing loss. Your care team will most likely have your hearing checked (with an audiogram) before starting treatment to compare to later if you happen to have hearing problems from chemo.  
Nutrition and speech tests
Often, you will have a nutritionist who will evaluate your nutrition status before, during, and after your treatment to try and keep your weight and protein stores as normal as possible. You might also visit a speech therapist who will test your ability to swallow and speak. They might give you exercises to do during treatment to help strengthen the muscles in the head and neck area so you can eat and talk easily after treatment.After someone is diagnosed with oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer, doctors will try to figure out if it has spread, and if so, how far. This process is called staging. The stage of a cancer describes how much cancer is in the body. It helps determine how serious the cancer is and how best to treat it. Doctors also use a cancer's stage when talking about survival statistics.
The earliest stage oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancers are called stage 0 (carcinoma in situ). Stages then range from I (1) through IV (4). As a rule, the lower the number, the less the cancer has spread. A higher number, such as stage IV, means cancer has spread more. And within a stage, an earlier letter means a lower stage. Although each person’s cancer experience is unique, cancers with similar stages tend to have a similar outlook and are often treated in much the same way.
How is the stage determined?
The staging system most often used for oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancers is the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) TNM system, which is based on 3 key pieces of information:

The extent of the tumor (T): How large is the main (primary) tumor and which, if any, tissues of the oral cavity or oropharynx it has spread to?
The spread to nearby lymph nodes (N): Has the cancer spread to nearby lymph nodes? If so, how many , are they on the same side where the cancer started, and how large are they?
The spread (metastasis) to distant sites (M): Has the cancer spread to distant organs such as the lungs?

Numbers or letters after T, N, and M provide more details about each of these factors. Higher numbers mean the cancer is more advanced. Once a person’s T, N, and M categories have been determined, this information is combined in a process called stage grouping to assign an overall stage. For more information see Cancer Staging.
The staging system in the table below is based on the most recent AJCC system, effective January 2018. It uses the pathologic stage (also called the surgical stage). It's determined by examining the tissue removed during an operation. Sometimes, if surgery isn't possible right away or at all, the cancer will be given a clinical stage instead (which is not shown below). This is based on the results of a physical exam, endoscopy exam, biopsy, and imaging tests. The clinical stage will be used to help plan treatment. Sometimes, though, the cancer has spread further than the clinical stage estimates, and it may not predict the patient’s outlook as accurately as a pathologic stage.
Oropharyngeal cancers that contain HPV DNA (called p16-positive) tend to have a better outlook than those without HPV (p16-negative). Because p16-positive cancers have a better prognosis than p16-negative oropharyngeal cancers, separate staging systems are used. Both systems are described below.
Cancer staging can be complex, so ask your doctor to explain it to you in a way you understand. Explore the 3D interactive model here to learn more.Survival rates can give you an idea of what percentage of people with the same type and stage of cancer are still alive a certain amount of time (usually 5 years) after they were diagnosed. They can’t tell you how long you will live, but they may help give you a better understanding of how likely it is that your treatment will be successful.
Keep in mind that survival rates are estimates and are often based on previous outcomes of large numbers of people who had a specific cancer, but they can’t predict what will happen in any particular person’s case. These statistics can be confusing and may lead you to have more questions. Ask your doctor, who is familiar with your situation, how these numbers might apply to you.  
What is a 5-year relative survival rate?
A relative survival rate compares people with the same type and stage of cancer to people in the overall population. For example, if the 5-year relative survival rate for a specific stage of cancer is 90%, it means that people who have that cancer are, on average, about 90% as likely as people who don’t have that cancer to live for at least 5 years after being diagnosed.
Where do these numbers come from?
The American Cancer Society relies on information from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database, maintained by the National Cancer Institute (NCI), to provide survival statistics for different types of cancer.
The SEER database tracks 5-year relative survival rates for oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers in the United States, based on how far the cancer has spread. The SEER database, however, does not group cancers by AJCC TNM stages (stage 1, stage 2, stage 3, etc.). Instead, it groups cancers into localized, regional, and distant stages:

Localized: There is no sign the cancer has spread outside the organ where it started (for example, the lip, tongue, or floor of mouth).
Regional: The cancer has spread to nearby structures or lymph nodes.
Distant: The cancer has spread to distant parts of the body such as the lungs.

5-year relative survival rates for oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers
These numbers are based on people diagnosed with cancers of the oral cavity (mouth) or oropharynx (the part of the throat behind the mouth) between 2012 and 2018.
Lip



SEER Stage
5-Year Relative Survival Rate


Localized
94%


Regional
63%


Distant
38%


All SEER stages combined
91%



Tongue



SEER Stage
5-Year Relative Survival Rate 


Localized
84%


Regional
70%


Distant
41%


All SEER stages combined
69%



Floor of the mouth



SEER Stage
5-Year Relative Survival Rate 


Localized
73%


Regional
42%


Distant
23%


All SEER stages combined
53%



Oropharynx



SEER Stage
5-year Relative Survival Rate


Localized
59%*


Regional
62%*


Distant
29%


All SEER stages combined
52%



*The 5-year relative survival for these cancers at the regional stage is slightly better than for the localized stage. The reason for this is not clear, although it's important to know that these rates are based on small numbers of cases.
Understanding the numbers

These numbers apply only to the stage of the cancer when it is first diagnosed. They do not apply later on if the cancer grows, spreads, or comes back after treatment.
These numbers don’t take everything into account. Survival rates are grouped based on how far the cancer has spread, but your age and overall health, how well the cancer responds to treatment, and other factors will also affect your outlook. Currently, these survival rates are not based on the p16 (HPV) status of the cancer, which could also affect your outlook.
People now being diagnosed with oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer may have a better outlook than these numbers show. Treatments improve over time, and these numbers are based on people who were diagnosed and treated at least 5 years earlier.It's important to have honest, open discussions with your cancer care team. They want to answer all your questions, so that you can make informed treatment and life decisions. 
Other health care professionals, such as nurses, dentists, nutritionists, and social workers, can also answer some of your questions. You can find out more in The Doctor-Patient Relationship.
Not all of these questions may apply to you, but asking the ones that do may be helpful. Here are some questions to get you started.
When you’re told you have oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer

What kind of oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer do I have?
Where is my cancer located?
Has my cancer spread beyond where it started?
What is the stage (extent) of my cancer and what does that mean?
Will I need other tests before we can decide on treatment?
Do I need to see other doctors or health professionals?
Has my cancer been tested for the human papillomavirus (HPV)?
If I’m concerned about the costs and insurance coverage for my diagnosis and treatment, who can help me?
Is there a clinical trial available you think I should know about?

When deciding on a treatment plan

How much experience do you have treating this type of cancer?
What are my treatment options? Which do you recommend and why?
What is the goal of the treatment?
Will this treatment affect the way I look? If so, what are my options for reconstruction?
Should I get a second opinion? How do I do that? Can you recommend someone?
What if I have transportation problems getting to and from treatment?
What are the chances I can be cured of this cancer with these treatment options?
How quickly do I need to decide on treatment?
What should I do to be ready for treatment?
Will I need a feeding tube before starting treatment?
How long will treatment last? What will it be like? Where will it be done?
Will treatment affect my daily activities?
Can I still work full time?
What risks and side effects can I expect from the treatments you suggest? How long are they likely to last?
What are my options if the treatment doesn’t work or if the cancer comes back (recurs)?

During treatment

How will I know if the treatment is working?
Is there anything I can do to help manage side effects?
What symptoms or side effects should I tell you about right away?
How can I reach you on nights, holidays, or weekends?
Do I need to change what I eat during treatment?
Are there any limits on what I can do or what I can eat?
Can I exercise during treatment? If so, what kind should I do, and how often?
Can you suggest a mental health professional I can see if I start to feel overwhelmed, depressed, or distressed?
What if I need social support during treatment because my family lives far away?


After treatment

Will I need a special diet after treatment?
Are there any limits on what I can do?
What symptoms should I watch for?
What kind of exercise should I do now?
What type of follow-up will I need after treatment?
How often will I need to have follow-up exams and imaging tests?
When should my next endoscopy be done?
Will I need any blood tests?
How will we know if the cancer has come back? What should I watch for?
What will my options be if the cancer comes back?
How can I reach you in an emergency?

Along with these sample questions, be sure to write down some of your own. For instance, you might want more information about recovery times so you can plan your work or activity schedule.Surgery is often the first treatment used for these cancers. Several types of operations can be done to treat oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers, depending on where the cancer is located and its stage. It's most commonly used for small, early-stage cancers that haven't spread.
After the cancer is removed, reconstructive surgery might be done to help restore the appearance and function of the areas affected by the cancer or cancer treatment.
Studies have shown that people with head and neck cancer who are treated at facilities that perform a lot of head and neck cancer surgeries, tend to live longer. Because of this and the complex nature of these operations, it’s very important to have a surgeon and cancer center who has experience treating these cancers.
Quit smoking
If you smoke, quitting for good (before treatment starts, if possible) is the best way to improve your chances for survival. Smoking during cancer treatment can increase the risk of side effects after surgery and is linked to poor wound healing and worse outcomes. Smoking after treatment can also increase the risk of the cancer coming back as well as the risk of getting a new cancer. It is never too late to quit .
Tumor resection
In a tumor resection, the entire tumor and a margin (edge) of normal-looking tissue around it is removed (resected). The margin of normal tissue is taken out to reduce the chance of any cancer cells being left behind.
The main (primary) tumor is removed using a method based on its size and location. For example, if a tumor is in the front of the mouth, it might be relatively easy to remove it through the mouth. But a larger tumor (especially when it has grown into the oropharynx) may need to be removed through an incision (cut) in the neck or by cutting the jaw bone with a special saw to get to the tumor. (This is called a mandibulotomy.)
Based on the location and size of the tumor, one of the operations listed here may be done to remove it:
Mohs micrographic surgery (for some cancers of the lip)
Some cancers of the lip, such as those at the very edge of the lip, may be removed by Mohs surgery, also known as micrographic surgery. The tumor is removed in very thin slices. Each slice is looked at right away under the microscope to see if it has cancer cells. Slices are removed and examined until no cancer cells are seen.
With this method, the amount of normal tissue removed with the tumor is reduced and the change in appearance caused by the surgery is limited. It requires a surgeon trained in the technique and may take more time than a standard tumor resection.
Glossectomy (removal of the tongue)
Glossectomy may be needed to treat cancer of the tongue. For smaller cancers, only part of the tongue (less than 1/3) may need to be removed (partial glossectomy). For larger cancers, the entire tongue may need to be removed (total glossectomy).
Mandibulectomy (removal of the jaw bone)
For a mandibulectomy (or mandibular resection), the surgeon removes all or part of the jaw bone (mandible). This operation might be needed if the tumor has grown into the jaw bone. If a tumor near the jaw is hard to move when the doctor examines it, it often means that the cancer has grown into the jaw bone.
If the jaw bone looks normal on imaging tests and there's no evidence the cancer has spread there, the bone may not need to be cut all the way through. In this operation, also known as a partial-thickness mandibular resection or marginal mandibulectomy, the surgeon removes only part or a piece of jaw bone.
If the x-ray shows the tumor has grown into the jaw bone, a large part of the jaw will need to be removed in an operation called a segmental mandibulectomy. The removed piece of the mandible can then be replaced with a piece of bone from another part of the body, such as the lower leg, hip bone, or the shoulder blade. A metal plate or a piece of bone from a deceased donor may also be used to repair the bone.
Maxillectomy
If cancer has grown into the hard palate (front part of the roof of the mouth), all or part of the involved bone (maxilla) will need to be removed. This operation is called a maxillectomy or partial maxillectomy.
This operation makes a hole in the roof of the mouth which can be filled with a special denture called a prosthesis. This is created by a prosthodontist, a dentist with special training. Other options to close this gap include a skin graft or a piece of muscle from the forearm or thigh.
Robotic surgery
More and more, trans-oral robotic surgery (TORS) is being used to remove cancers of the back of the throat and mouth that might otherwise need a mandibulectomy for the surgeon to reach the tumor. The surgeon sits at a control panel in the operating room and with the help of an attached camera moves robotic arms with small tools on them to cut out the tumor.
Because the more standard, open surgeries for throat cancer can result in more extensive operations, newer robotic surgeries may allow surgeons to completely remove throat cancers with fewer side effects. Since these procedures are newer, it's important to have them done by surgeons and at treatment centers that are experienced in this approach.
Laryngectomy (removal of the voice box)
Very rarely, surgery to remove large tumors at the base of the tongue or oropharynx may require removing tissue that a person needs to swallow normally. As a result, food may enter the windpipe (trachea) and reach the lungs, where it can cause pneumonia. When there's a high risk of this, the voice box (larynx) may also be removed during the same operation as the one to remove the cancer. Removal of the larynx is called a laryngectomy.
When the voice box is removed, the windpipe is attached to a hole (stoma) made in the skin in the front of the neck. You breathe and cough through this stoma (instead of breathing through the mouth or nose). This is called a tracheostomy or trach.
Losing your voice box will mean that normal speech is no longer possible, but people can learn other ways to speak. See Living as a Laryngeal and Hypopharyngeal Cancer Survivor to find out more about voice restoration.Studies have shown that people who are treated at centers that treat a lot of head and neck cancers with radiation, tend to live longer. And because of the complicated types of surgeries, along with the need for coordination between cancer specialists to make a complete treatment plan, it’s very important to have treatment at cancer centers by radiation oncologists who have experience in treating these cancers. 
Radiation therapy uses high-energy x-rays or particles to destroy cancer cells or slow their growth. Depending on the stage of the oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer and other factors, radiation therapy might be used:

Alone as the main treatment for small cancers or for people who can’t have surgery.
After surgery (adjuvant therapy), either alone or with chemotherapy (chemoradiation), to try to kill any cancer cells that might have been left behind because they were too small to be seen with the naked eye during surgery. Radiation after surgery can also help lower the chance the cancer will come back in the same spot.
Before surgery (neoadjuvant therapy) with chemotherapy (chemoradiation) or after chemotherapy to try to shrink some larger cancers. In some cases, this might make it possible to use less extensive surgery and remove less tissue.
With a targeted drug for larger cancers, if chemotherapy is not an option.
To help ease symptoms of advanced cancer, such as pain, bleeding, trouble swallowing, and problems caused by cancer spread to lungs or bones.
To treat cancer that has come back after treatment (recurrence).

Chemoradiation (radiation given at the same time as chemotherapy) often works better than radiation alone, but it also has more side effects.
Radiation to this part of your body can cause problems for your teeth and gums, so it's important to see a dentist before starting treatment. A dentist can make sure your mouth is healthy before treatment. They might recommend that certain bad teeth be removed before you start radiation because this can increase your chance of infection. During and after treatment your dentist can help check for and treat any problems that may come up, such as infection or tooth and bone damage.
Quit smoking before oral and oropharyngeal cancer treatment
If you smoke, it is important to quit. Smoking during radiation treatment can cause more side effects and a poor response to radiation, which can raise your risk of the cancer coming back (recurrence).  Smoking after treatment also increases the chance of getting a new cancer. Quitting smoking for good (before treatment starts, if possible) is the best way to improve your chances for successful treatment. It is never too late to quit. For help, see How To Quit Using Tobacco.
External beam radiation used for oral and oropharyngeal cancers
External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) is the type of radiation therapy most often used to treat oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer or its spread to other organs. It focuses radiation from a source outside the body onto the cancer.
Before EBRT, a somewhat flexible but sturdy mesh head and neck mask might be made to hold your head, neck, and shoulders in the exact same position for each treatment. Some people might feel a bit confined while this mask is on and might need to ask for medicine to help them relax during the treatment. Sometimes, the mask can be adjusted so that it is not too constricting. Discuss your options with your radiation oncologist. You might also be fitted for a bite block that you hold in your mouth during treatment
Treatment is much like getting an x-ray, but the radiation dose is stronger. The procedure itself is without pain and each treatment lasts only a few minutes. The setup time (getting you into place for treatment) often takes longer.
Different types of EBRT
There are also more advanced EBRT techniques that help doctors focus the radiation more precisely.
Three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy (3D-CRT) uses special computers to precisely map the location of the tumor. Several radiation beams are then shaped and aimed at the tumor from different directions, which makes it less likely to damage normal tissues.
Intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is a form of 3D-CRT. It uses a computer-driven machine that actually moves around the patient as it delivers radiation. Along with shaping the beams and aiming them at the tumor from several angles, the intensity (strength) of the beams can be adjusted to limit the dose reaching nearby normal tissues. This may let the doctor deliver a higher dose to the tumor.
Proton beam radiation therapy  focuses beams of protons instead of x-rays on the cancer. Unlike x-rays, which go through the patient and release radiation both before and after they hit the tumor, protons only travel a certain distance, so the tissues behind the tumor are exposed to very little radiation. Even the tissues in front of the tumor see less radiation than the tumor itself. This means that proton beam radiation can deliver radiation to the cancer while doing less damage to nearby normal tissues. Because there are so many critical structures close by, proton beam radiation can be used to treat certain tumors of the oral cavity or oropharynx. Proton therapy can be a safe option in certain cases when using x-rays is not.
Proton therapy is not widely available in the United States. The machines needed to make protons are very expensive. Proton therapy might also not be covered by all insurance companies at this time.
Different treatment schedules for EBRT
Standard EBRT for oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancers is usually given in daily fractions (doses) 5 days a week for about 7 weeks. But sometimes other schedules might be used:

Hyperfractionation radiation is a slightly lower radiation dose given more than once a day (for example, twice a day for 7 weeks). 
Accelerated fractionation radiation is the standard dose of radiation given each day but over a shorter time (5 to 6 weeks) instead of the usual 7 weeks (for example, radiation is given 6 days a week over 5 weeks instead of the standard 5 days a week for 7 weeks). 
Hypofractionation radiation is a slightly higher radiation dose given each day to lessen the number of treatments (for example, a higher radiation dose is given each day for 6 weeks, not the standard 7 weeks).

Hyperfractionation and accelerated fractionation schedules may reduce the risk of cancer coming back in or near the place it started (called local recurrence) and might help some people live longer compared to standard EBRT. The drawback is that treatments given on these schedules also tend to have more severe side effects. Adding chemotherapy to these treatment schedules (chemoradiation) doesn't appear to improve outcomes more.
Brachytherapy for oral and oropharyngeal cancers
Brachytherapy is rarely used to treat oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancers as a first treatment, but it might be used if the cancer recurs (comes back).
Possible side effects of radiation therapy for oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer
If you are going to get radiation therapy, it’s important to ask your doctor about the possible side effects so you know what to expect.
Radiation to the mouth and throat area can cause several short-term side effects depending on where the radiation is aimed and can include:

Skin changes like a sunburn or suntan in the treated area
Hoarseness
Loss of taste
Redness, soreness, or even pain in the mouth and throat
Dry mouth
Trouble swallowing
Feeling tired
Open sores in the mouth and throat

Long-lasting or permanent side effects of radiation therapy
Poor nutrition and trouble swallowing: Many people treated with radiation to the oral cavity and throat area have painful sores in the mouth and throat that can make it very hard to eat and drink. This can lead to weight loss and poor nutrition. The sores heal with time after the radiation ends, but some people continue to have problems swallowing long after treatment ends because of the tightening of the muscles caused by radiation. Ask your speech pathologist about swallowing exercises you can do to help keep those muscles working and increase your chance of eating normally after treatment. Liquid feeding through a tube placed into the stomach might be needed. (See Surgery for Oral Cavity and Oropharyngeal Cancer for more on tube feedings.)
Dry mouth: Damage to the salivary (spit) glands from radiation can cause a dry mouth that doesn't get better with time. This can lead to discomfort and problems eating and swallowing, as well as damage to the jaw bone.
The lack of saliva can also lead to tooth decay (cavities). People treated with radiation to the mouth or neck need to practice careful oral hygiene to help prevent this problem and see their dentist regularly. Fluoride treatments may also help.
Damage to the jaw bone: This problem, known as osteoradionecrosis of the jaw, can be a serious side effect of radiation treatment. This is more common after tooth infection, extraction, or trauma, and it can be hard to treat. The main symptom is pain in the jaw. In some cases, the bone actually breaks. Sometimes the fractured bone heals by itself, but often the damaged bone will have to be repaired with surgery.
To help prevent this problem, people getting radiation to the mouth or throat area need to see a dentist to have any problems with their teeth treated before radiation is started. In some cases, teeth may need to be removed.
Thyroid problems: Radiation might damage your thyroid gland. Your doctor will do blood tests regularly to see how well your thyroid is working. You may need treatment if it's been damaged and is not working well. 
Lymphedema: Some people treated with radiation therapy might be at risk of developing lymphedema in the head and neck areas that were treated. These areas can become swollen and firm. This can be worse if the person also had surgery. Sometimes, medicines, physical therapy, or massage therapy might be helpful.
Damage to the carotid artery: Radiation to the neck area might increase a person’s risk of stroke many years after treatment. This might be because of health problems that were already present before radiation such as narrowing of the artery or an increase in plaques which can both decrease blood flow. People who smoke are also damaging their arteries. Because of this some doctors might order regular ultrasounds for you after treatment, to keep an eye on the arteries.Quit smoking before oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer treatment
If you smoke, you should quit. Smoking during chemotherapy treatment can cause more side effects and can cause the chemo drugs to not work as well. It can give you a higher chance of getting an infection and is linked to worse outcomes. Smoking after treatment can also increase the risk of the cancer coming back and of getting another new cancer. Quitting smoking (before treatment starts, if possible) is the best way to improve your chances of survival. It is never too late to quit. For help, see How To Quit Using Tobacco.
How is chemotherapy used to treat oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers?
Chemotherapy (chemo) is treatment with anti-cancer drugs that are injected into a vein or taken by mouth, which allows them to enter the blood and reach most parts of the body. 
Chemo might be used at different times in the treatment process for treatment of oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancers:

Adjuvant chemotherapy is given after surgery and is sometimes combined with radiation therapy. The goal is to kill cancer cells that might have been left behind at surgery because they were too small to see. This helps lower the chance that the cancer will come back.
Neoadjuvant or induction chemotherapy is given before surgery. Sometimes the chemo is given first followed by radiation. Other times, it is given at the same time as radiation. The goal is to shrink some larger cancers to make surgery easier and remove less tissue. This can lead to fewer serious side effects and problems from surgery.
For advanced cancer, chemo (with or without radiation therapy) can be used to treat cancers that are too large or have spread too far to be removed by surgery. The goal is to slow the growth of the cancer for as long as possible and to help relieve any symptoms the cancer is causing.

Chemoradiation
Chemoradiation is chemotherapy given at the same time as radiation. It has been shown to shrink oral cavity and oropharyngeal tumors more than either treatment alone and is helpful for people whose cancers are not widespread, but are too advanced for surgery. But this combined approach can be hard to tolerate, especially for people in poor health.
A preferred schedule is to give a dose of cisplatin every 3 weeks (for a total of 2 to 3 doses) during radiation. For people who cannot tolerate chemo, the targeted drug cetuximab might be used with radiation instead. See below for more chemo drugs that might be used with radiation.
How is chemotherapy given?
Chemo drugs for oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer are usually given by mouth or into a vein (IV) as an infusion over a certain period of time. This can be done in a doctor’s office, infusion center, or in a hospital setting.
Often, a slightly larger and sturdier IV is required in the vein system for chemo. These IVs are known as central venous catheters (CVCs) , central venous access devices (CVADs), or central lines. They are used to put medicines, blood products, nutrients, or fluids right into your blood. They can also be used to take blood for tests. There are many different kinds of CVCs. The most common types are the port and the PICC line.
Chemotherapy is given in cycles: one drug or a combination of drugs given on a set schedule, followed by a rest period. Common schedules of chemo cycles can be once a week, once every 3 weeks, or once every 4 weeks. The schedule depends on the drugs used. The chemo schedule repeats to start the next cycle.
Adjuvant or neoadjuvant chemo is often given for a total of 3 to 6 months, depending on the drugs used. The length of treatment depends on how well it is working and what side effects you might have.
Chemo drugs used to treat oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer
The chemo drugs used most often for cancers of the oral cavity and oropharynx that can be given with or without radiation include:

Cisplatin
Carboplatin
5-fluorouracil (5-FU)
Paclitaxel (Taxol)
Docetaxel (Taxotere)
Hydroxyurea

Other drugs that are used less often include:

Methotrexate
Capecitabine

A chemo drug may be used alone or combined with other drugs. Combining drugs can often shrink tumors better, but tend to cause more side effects. A commonly used combination is carboplatin and 5-FU. This combination works better than either drug alone in shrinking cancers of the oral cavity and oropharynx. Another combination often used is cisplatin, 5-FU, plus docetaxel. In certain cases, chemo might be given along with a targeted drug or immunotherapy.
Possible side effects of chemotherapy
Chemo drugs attack cells that are dividing quickly, which is why they work against cancer cells. But other cells in the body, such as those in the bone marrow, the lining of the mouth and intestines, and the hair follicles also divide quickly and are affected. This can lead to side effects.
The side effects of chemo depend on the type and dose of drugs given and how long they are taken. Common side effects can include:

Hair loss
Mouth sores
Loss of appetite or weight loss
Nausea and vomiting
Diarrhea
Nail changes
Skin changes

Chemo can affect the blood-producing cells of the bone marrow, which can lead to:

Increased chance of infections (from low white blood cell counts)
Easy bruising or bleeding (from low blood platelet counts)
Fatigue (from low red blood cell counts)

Along with the risks above, some side effects are seen more often with certain chemo drugs. For example, 5-FU often causes diarrhea. This might need to be treated with drugs like loperamide. Cisplatin, docetaxel, and paclitaxel can cause nerve damage (called neuropathy). This can lead to numbness and tingling in the hands and feet. This often improves once treatment is stopped, but for some people it can last a long time. Cisplatin can also cause kidney damage. To help prevent this, intravenous (IV) fluid is given before and after each dose.
Most side effects tend to get better over time once treatment is stopped. Some, such as neuropathy can last a long time or even be permanent. If your doctor plans treatment with chemo be sure to discuss the drugs that will be used and the possible side effects. Once chemo is started, tell your health care team if you notice any changes or have any side effects. There are ways to prevent or treat many of the side effects of chemo. For example, many drugs are available to help prevent or treat nausea and vomiting. In some cases, the doses of the chemo drugs may need to be reduced or treatment may need to be delayed or stopped to help keep the problem from getting worse.What is targeted drug therapy?
Targeted drug therapy is the use of medicines that target or are directed at proteins on cancer cells that help them grow, spread, and live longer. Targeted drug therapy can be used to treat oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers by destroying cancer cells or slowing their growth. Their side effects are different from chemotherapy (sometimes less severe) and many are taken as a pill.
Some targeted drugs, for example, monoclonal antibodies, work in more than one way to control cancer cells and may also be considered immunotherapy because they boost the immune system.
Drug that targets cancer cells with EGFR changes
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a protein that helps cancer cells grow. Drugs that target EGFR can be used to treat some oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancers.
Cetuximab for oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancers
Cetuximab (Erbitux) is a monoclonal antibody, which is a man-made version of an immune system protein. It targets the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) protein on the surface of certain cells that helps cells grow and divide. Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer cells often have higher than normal amounts of EGFR. By blocking EGFR, cetuximab can help slow or stop cancer cell growth.
Cetuximab can be combined with radiation therapy for some earlier stage cancers. For more advanced cancers, it may be combined with standard chemo drugs such as cisplatin, or it may be used by itself.
Cetuximab is given by infusion into a vein (IV), either once a week or every other week.
Possible side effects of targeted drug therapy
Many people develop skin problems such as an acne-like rash on the face and chest during treatment, which in some cases can lead to infections. Cetuximab can make your skin very sensitive to the sun, so you'll need to protect your skin while getting treatment and for at least months after treatment. Other side effects may include headache, tiredness, fever, and diarrhea.
A rare but serious side effect of cetuximab is an allergic reaction during the first infusion, which could cause problems with breathing and low blood pressure. You may be given medicine before treatment to help prevent this.Immunotherapy can be used to treat oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers. Immunotherapy is the use of medicines to help boost a person’s own immune system to find and destroy cancer cells more effectively. It typically works on specific proteins involved in the immune system to enhance the immune response. It has different (sometimes less severe) side effects than chemotherapy.
Some immunotherapy drugs, for example, monoclonal antibodies, work in more than one way to control cancer cells and may also be considered targeted drug therapy because they block a specific protein on the cancer cell to keep it from growing.
Immune checkpoint inhibitors for oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers
An important part of the immune system is its ability to keep itself from attacking normal cells in the body. To do this, it uses “checkpoints,”  proteins on immune cells that need to be turned on (or off) to start an immune response. Cancer cells sometimes use these checkpoints to avoid being attacked by the immune system.
Drugs that target these checkpoints (called checkpoint inhibitors) can be used to treat some people with oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer.
PD-1 inhibitors
Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) and nivolumab (Opdivo) are drugs that target PD-1, a protein on T cells in the immune system. PD-1 normally helps keep T cells from attacking other cells . By blocking PD-1, these drugs boost the immune response against cancer cells. This can shrink some tumors or slow their growth.
These drugs can be used after chemotherapy stops working in people with oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer that has returned after treatment (recurrent) or that has spread to other parts of the body (metastatic).  Nivolumab is given as an intravenous (IV) infusion every 2 or 4 weeks. Pembrolizumab is given as an IV infusion every 3 or 6 weeks.
Pembrolizumab, alone or with chemotherapy, is also an option as the first treatment in some people whose cancer has recurred, is metastatic, or cannot be removed with surgery. It is given as an IV infusion every 3 or 6 weeks.
Possible side effects of PD-1 inhibitors
Side effects of these drugs can include fatigue, cough, nausea, diarrhea, skin rash, loss of appetite, constipation, joint pain, and itching.
Other, more serious side effects occur less often.
Infusion reactions: Some people might have an infusion reaction while getting these drugs. This is like an allergic reaction, and can cause fever, chills, flushing of the face, rash, itchy skin, feeling dizzy, wheezing, and trouble breathing. It’s important to tell your doctor or nurse right away if you have any of these symptoms while getting these drugs.
Autoimmune reactions: These drugs work by removing one of the safeguards of the body’s immune system. Sometimes the immune system starts attacking other parts of the body, which can cause serious or even life-threatening problems in the lungs, intestines, liver, hormone-making glands, kidneys, nerves, skin, or other organs.
It’s very important to report any new side effects during or after treatment with any of these drugs to your health care team promptly. If serious side effects do occur, you might need to stop treatment and take high doses of corticosteroids to suppress your immune system.Many treatments for oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer are intended to remove or to destroy the cancer cells or slow their growth. For patients, maintaining their quality of life for as long as possible is another important goal of treatment. This is true for people being treated to try to cure the cancer and for people whose cancer is too advanced to be cured.
Supportive care can help ease physical symptoms from the cancer or its treatment, can help people cope with feelings they might have related to the diagnosis, and can also support caregivers. Supportive care works best if it is added to a person’s care early on in their diagnosis, especially for those people with advanced cancer. Some studies show it may even help people live longer.
Pain management and oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer
Pain is a significant concern for many people with cancer. It can almost always be treated with milder drugs like ibuprofen or acetaminophen or, if needed, with stronger medicines like morphine or drugs like it (known as opioids). Sometimes, procedures like surgery, a nerve block, or radiation might be options to lessen pain. For more on pain, what can be done about it, and how to keep track of it, see Cancer Pain.
Nutrition and oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer
Keeping healthy through nutrition is another important concern for people with oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancers. Both the cancer and its treatment can make it hard to swallow and to eat or drink. If this is the case, a feeding tube may be needed. (See Surgery for Oral and Oropharyngeal Cancer.) This tube will most likely be needed during treatment, but in some cases it might need to be left in longer. For more about what to eat during cancer treatment, see Nutrition for People with Cancer.
There are many other ways your cancer care team can help you maintain your quality of life and help control your symptoms. But you have to tell your team how you're feeling and what symptoms you're having. Some people don’t like to disappoint their doctors by telling them they're not feeling well. Others just don't want to complain. This is not helpful to you or your treatment goals. Tell your doctor how you really feel. Talking about the symptoms you're having lets your doctor give treatments or medicines that can help relieve them which can help you handle treatment better. You will probably feel better and be able to focus on the things that are important to you.Treatment for oral cavity cancer is based largely on the stage (extent) of the cancer, but other factors can also be important.
Most experts agree that treatment in a clinical trial should be considered for any cancer in the head and neck area. This way, people might have the chance of getting new treatments that may be better than standard ones.
Stage 0 (carcinoma in situ) oral cavity cancer
Although cancer in this stage is on the surface layer and has not started to grow into deeper layers of tissue, it can do so if not treated. The usual treatment is surgery (usually Mohs surgery, surgical stripping, or thin resection) to remove the top layers of tissue along with a small margin (edge) of normal tissue. Follow-up is important to watch for any signs that the cancer has come back. Carcinoma in situ that keeps coming back after surgery may also need to be treated with radiation therapy.
Nearly all people with this stage survive a long time without the need for more treatment. Still, it's important to note that continuing to smoke increases the risk that a new cancer will develop. If you're thinking about quitting smoking and need help, talk to your doctor, or call the American Cancer Society at 1-800-227-2345 for information and support.
Stages I and II oral cavity cancer
Most patients with stage I or II oral cavity cancers do well when treated with surgery and/or radiation therapy. Chemotherapy (chemo) given along with radiation (called chemoradiation) is another option. Both surgery and radiation work equally well in treating these cancers. The choice depends on your preferences and the expected side effects, including how the treatment might affect how you look and how you swallow and speak.
Lip
Surgery is preferred for small cancers that can be removed. Radiation alone may also be used as the first treatment.
Large or deep cancers often require surgery. If needed, reconstructive surgery can help correct the defect in the lip.
If the tumor is thick, it increases the possibility that the cancer might have spread to lymph nodes in the neck. If abnormal lymph nodes are felt or seen on an imaging test,  the surgeon might remove them (called lymph node dissection) so they can be checked for cancer spread.
Oral cavity
For cancers of the floor of the mouth, front of the tongue, inside of the cheek, gums, and hard palate, surgery is the main treatment. Lymph nodes in the neck might be removed (called lymph node dissection) to check them for cancer spread. If it looks like surgery hasn't completely removed the cancer or if there is a high chance of it coming back, radiation alone or chemoradiation might be added.
Radiation can be used instead of surgery as the main treatment for some people. This is most often done for people who can’t have surgery because of other medical problems.
Stages III and IVA oral cavity cancer
These cancers in the floor of the mouth, front of the tongue, inside of the cheek, gums, and hard palate include bigger cancers, those that have grown into nearby tissues, and/or those that have spread to nearby lymph nodes in the neck. Surgery is usually done first and includes taking out some of the neck lymph nodes (lymph node dissection). Surgery is most often followed by radiation alone or chemoradiation. 
Stages IVB and IVC oral cavity cancer
Stage IVB cancers have already spread into nearby tissues, structures, and maybe lymph nodes. Stage IVC cancers have spread to other parts of the body, such as the lungs.
People with stage IVB cancers that cannot be removed by surgery or who are too weak for surgery might be treated with radiation alone. Depending on a person’s overall health, chemoradiation or chemotherapy first followed by radiation might be options. Chemotherapy alone may also be recommended.
Stage IVC cancers are usually treated with chemo, cetuximab, or both. Immunotherapy, alone or with chemo, might be another option. Treatments such as radiation can also be used to help relieve symptoms from the cancer or to help prevent new problems.
Recurrent oral cavity cancer
When cancer comes backs after treatment, it's called recurrent cancer. It can come back in or near the same place the cancer first started (local), in nearby lymph nodes (regional), or it can spread to other organs such as the lungs or bone (distant). Treatment options for recurrent cancers depend on the location and size of the cancer, what treatments have already been used, and the person’s general health. Because these cancers can be hard to treat, clinical trials of newer treatments may be a good option for some people.
If the cancer comes back in the same area and radiation therapy was used as the first treatment, surgery is often the next treatment, if the cancer can be removed completely and the patient is healthy enough for surgery. Usually, external beam radiation therapy cannot be repeated in the same site except in certain cases. But internal radiation (brachytherapy) can often be used to control the cancer if it has come back in the place it started. If surgery was used first, more surgery, radiation therapy, chemo, cetuximab, immunotherapy, or a combination of these may be options.
If the cancer comes back in the lymph nodes in the neck, the nodes are often removed with surgery (lymph node dissection). This may be followed by radiation or chemoradiation.
If the cancer comes back in a distant area, chemo (and/or cetuximab) is often used. Immunotherapy with or without chemo might be an option as well. These treatments may shrink or slow the growth of some cancers for a while and help relieve symptoms, but these cancers are very hard to cure.
If further treatment is recommended, it’s important to talk to your doctor so that you understand what the goal of treatment is — whether it's to try to cure the cancer or to keep it under control for as long as possible and to relieve symptoms. This can help you weigh the risks and benefits of each treatment.This information is based on AJCC Staging systems prior to 2018 which were primarily based on tumor size and lymph node status. Since the updated staging system for oropharyngeal cancer now also includes the p16 (HPV) status of the tumor , the stages may be higher or lower than previous staging systems. Treatment strategies are slowly changing with this new staging system so you should discuss your stage and treatment options with your physician.  
Treatment for oropharyngeal cancer is based largely on the stage (extent) of the cancer and if it is caused by an HPV infection (p16-positive), but other factors can also be important.
Most experts agree that treatment in a clinical trial should be considered for any cancer in the head and neck areas. This way, people might have a chance to get new treatments that may be better than standard ones.
Stage 0 (carcinoma in situ) oropharyngeal cancer
Although cancer in this stage is on the surface layer and has not started to grow into deeper layers of tissue, it can do so if not treated. The usual treatment is surgery (usually Mohs surgery, surgical stripping, or thin resection) to remove the top layers of tissue along with a small margin (edge) of normal tissue. Close follow-up is important to watch for any signs that the cancer has come back. Carcinoma in situ that keeps coming back after surgery may need to be treated with radiation therapy.
Nearly all people with this stage live a long time without the need for more treatment. Still, it's important to note that continuing to smoke increases the risk that a new cancer will develop. If you're thinking about quitting smoking and need help, talk to your doctor, or call the American Cancer Society at 1-800-227-2345 for information and support.
Early-stage oropharyngeal cancer
Early-stage oropharyngeal cancers (back of the tongue, soft palate, and tonsils) typically include most stage I and II (p16/HPV-positive and p16/HPV-negative) cancers. The main treatment options include radiation therapy aimed at the cancer and the lymph nodes in the neck or surgery of the main tumor along with removal of the lymph nodes in the neck (lymph node dissection). After surgery, if any cancer remains or if there is a high chance of the cancer coming back, chemoradiation is often used. Sometimes, if imaging or a biopsy shows the lymph nodes in the neck have cancer, then chemoradiation might be the first treatment.
Locally advanced oropharyngeal cancer
Locally advanced oropharyngeal cancers are larger cancers in the back of the tongue, soft palate, and tonsils that have grown into nearby tissues, and/or have spread to nearby lymph nodes in the neck. In general, this would include most stage III, IVA, and IVB p16/HPV-negative cancers and most stage I, II and III p16/HPV-positive cancers in the TNM system.
Most locally advanced oropharyngeal cancers (p16/HPV-positive or p16/HPV-negative) are treated with chemoradiation. Surgery might also be an option if the surgeon thinks that the cancer can be removed safely. The choice of treatment is often guided by where the cancer is, how much it has spread, the expected side effects, patient preferences, and the patient’s current health status.
Any cancer that is still present after chemoradiation is often removed with surgery. If the cancer has spread to neck lymph nodes, they may also need to be removed (a lymph node dissection) after chemoradiation is done. Sometimes, chemo might be given as the first treatment, followed by radiation alone or chemoradiation, and then surgery if needed.
Metastatic oropharyngeal cancer
Metastatic oropharyngeal cancers (back of the tongue, soft palate, and tonsils) include stage IVC p16/HPV-negative cancers and stage IV p16/HPV-positive cancers that have spread to other parts of the body, such as the lungs. These cancers are usually treated with chemo, cetuximab, or both. Immunotherapy, alone or with chemo, might be another option. Treatments such as radiation may also be used to help relieve symptoms from the cancer or to help prevent new problems.
Recurrent oropharyngeal cancer
When cancer comes back after treatment, it's called recurrent cancer. It can come back in or near the same place the cancer first started (local), in nearby lymph nodes (regional), or it can spread to other organs such as the lungs or bone (distant). Treatment options for recurrent cancers depend on the location and size of the cancer, what treatments have already been used, and the person’s general health. Because these cancers can be hard to treat, clinical trials of newer treatments may be a good option for some people.
Treatment options for recurrent oropharyngeal cancer are the same as for recurrent oral cavity cancer.For many people, treatment will successfully remove or destroy oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer. The end of treatment can be both stressful and exciting. You may be relieved to finish treatment, but find it’s hard not to worry about cancer coming back. This is very common if you’ve had cancer.
For others, the cancer might never go away completely. Some people may get regular treatment with chemotherapy or targeted therapy or other treatments to try and help keep the cancer under control. Learning to live with cancer that does not go away can be difficult and very stressful. 
Ask your doctor for a survivorship care plan
Talk with your doctor about developing a survivorship care plan for you. This plan might include: 

A suggested schedule for follow-up exams and tests
A schedule for other tests you might need in the future, such as early detection (screening) tests for other types of cancer
A list of possible late- or long-term side effects from your treatment, including what to watch for and when you should contact your doctor
Suggestions for things you can do that might improve your health, including possibly lowering your chances of the cancer coming back, such as diet and physical activity suggestions
Reminders to keep your appointments with your primary care provider (PCP), who will monitor your general health care 

Follow-up care
People with cancer of the oral cavity or oropharynx are at risk of the cancer coming back and are at risk for developing new cancers in the head and neck area, so they must be watched closely after treatment. Your cancer care team will discuss which tests should be done and how often based on the type and stage of the cancer, the type of treatment you had, and the chance of the cancer coming back.
After you have completed treatment, you will likely have follow-up visits with your doctor for many years. It's very important to go to all of your follow-up appointments. During these visits, your doctors will ask if you are having any problems and may examine you, and order endoscopies, lab tests, or imaging tests to look for signs of cancer returning, a new cancer, or treatment side effects.
Almost any cancer treatment can have side effects. Some may last for a few weeks to several months, but others can last the rest of your life. Some side effects might not even show up until years after you have finished treatment. Your doctor visits are a good time to ask questions and talk about any changes or problems you notice or concerns you have. 
It's important to report any new symptoms to your doctor right away. This might help your doctor find recurrent cancer or a new cancer as early as possible, when the cancer is small and easier to treat.
Doctor visits and tests
If there are no signs of cancer, many doctors will recommend you have a physical exam and some of the tests listed below every few months for the first couple of years after treatment, then every 4 to 6 months or so for the next few years. People who were treated for early-stage cancers may do this less often.
Endoscopy: You will be examined with a scope about:

Every 1 to 3 months during the first year
Every 2 to 6 months during the second year
Every 4 to 8 months during the 3rd to 5th years
Every year after the 5th year

Quitting smoking: If you had trouble quitting smoking before treatment, your doctor may recommend counseling as well as medication to help you. It is very important to quit smoking because even people with early- stage oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer are at risk of a new smoking-related cancer if they continue to smoke. See Stay Away from Tobacco or call 1-800-227-2345 for more information about quitting smoking.
Blood tests: If you were treated with radiation to the neck, it might have affected your thyroid gland. You will most likely need regular blood tests to check your thyroid function.
Imaging: Chest x-rays and other imaging tests might be used to watch for recurrence or a new tumor, especially if you have new symptoms.
Dental exams: People treated with radiation may also have problems with dry mouth and tooth decay, so regular dental exams are often recommended.
Problems with eating and nutrition: Cancers of the mouth and throat and their treatments can sometimes cause problems such as loss or change in taste, dry mouth, or even loss of teeth. This can make it hard to eat, which can lead to weight loss and weakness due to poor nutrition.
Some people might need to adjust what they eat during and after treatment or might need nutritional supplements to help make sure they get the nutrition they need. Some may even need a feeding tube placed into the stomach, at least for a short time during and after treatment.
A team of doctors and nutritionists can work with you to help manage your individual nutritional needs. This can help you maintain your weight and get the nutrients you need. They can also talk to you about swallowing exercises that can help keep these muscles working and give you a better chance of eating normally after treatment. If a dry mouth is making it hard to eat, your doctor may recommend a saliva substitute.
Speech, hearing, and swallowing rehabilitation: Radiation, surgery, and certain chemo drugs can lead to problems with speech, swallowing, and hearing. Speech therapists are knowledgeable about speech and swallowing problems and can help you learn to manage them. You might also need to see an audiologist (a specialist in hearing) for devices to improve your hearing, if the treatment affected it.
Keeping health insurance and copies of your medical records
Even after treatment, it’s very important to keep health insurance. Tests and doctor visits cost a lot, and even though no one wants to think of their cancer coming back, this could happen.
At some point after your cancer treatment, you might find yourself seeing a new doctor who doesn’t know about your medical history. It’s important to keep copies of your medical records to give your new doctor the details of your diagnosis and treatment.
Can I lower my risk of oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer progressing or coming back?
If you have (or have had) oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer, you probably want to know if there are things you can do that might lower your risk of the cancer growing or coming back, such as exercising, eating a certain type of diet, or taking nutritional supplements. Unfortunately, it’s not yet clear if there are things you can do that will help.
Quit smoking: Smoking during cancer treatment is known to reduce the benefit of treatment which can raise your risk of the cancer coming back (recurrence). Smoking also increases the risk of getting a new smoking-related cancer (see Second Cancers below). Survivors of oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers who continue to smoke are also more likely to die from their cancer. Quitting smoking for good is the best way to improve your survival. It is never too late to quit. 
Adopting healthy behaviors such as  eating well, getting regular physical activity, and staying at a healthy weight might help, but no one knows for sure. However, we do know that these types of changes can have positive effects on your health that can extend beyond your risk of oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer or other cancers.
About dietary supplements
So far, no dietary supplements (including vitamins, minerals, and herbal products) have been shown to clearly help lower the risk of oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer progressing or coming back. This doesn’t mean that no supplements will help, but it’s important to know that none have been proven to do so.
Dietary supplements are not regulated like medicines in the United States. They do not have to be proven effective (or even safe) before being sold, although there are limits on what they’re allowed to claim they can do. If you’re thinking about taking any nutritional supplement, talk to your health care team. They can help you decide which ones you can use safely while avoiding those that might be harmful.
If the cancer comes back
If the cancer does come back (recur), your treatment options will depend on where it is located, what treatments you’ve had before, and your overall health. For more information on how recurrent cancer is treated, see ﻿Treatment Options for Oral Cavity and Oropharyngeal Cancer, by Stage.
For more general information, you may also want to see Understanding Recurrence.
Getting emotional support
Some amount of feeling depressed, anxious, or worried is normal when cancer is a part of your life. Some people are affected more than others. But everyone can benefit from help and support from other people, whether friends and family, religious groups, support groups, professional counselors, or others. Learn more in Life After Cancer.
Second cancers after oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer treatment
People who’ve had oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer can still get other cancers. In fact, oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer survivors are at higher risk for getting some other types of cancer.
Cancer survivors can be affected by a number of health problems, but often a major concern is facing cancer again. Cancer that comes back after treatment it is called a recurrence. But some cancer survivors develop a new, unrelated cancer later. This is called a second cancer.
Being treated for oral cavity or oropharyngeal cancer doesn’t mean you can’t get another cancer.
Survivors of cancers of the oropharynx can get any type of second cancer, but they have an increased risk of:

Lung cancer
Esophagus cancer
Cancers of the larynx and hypopharynx
Cancer of the oral cavity (including tongue and mouth)
Another cancer of the oropharynx (this is different than the first cancer coming back)
Pancreas cancer
Cancer of the bile ducts
Anal cancer
Cancer of the cervix
Colon cancer
Rectal cancer
Stomach cancer
Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)
Hodgkin lymphoma
Thyroid cancer

Many of these cancers are linked to smoking and alcohol use, which are also risk factors for HPV-negative oropharyngeal cancer.
Survivors of cancer of the oral cavity can get any second cancer, but they have an increased risk of:

Lung cancer
Esophagus cancer
Cancers of the larynx and hypopharynx
Another cancer of the oral cavity (this is different than the first cancer coming back)
Cancer of the oropharynx
Stomach cancer
Liver cancer
Colon cancer
Rectal cancer
Cancer of the cervix

Many of these cancers are also linked to smoking and alcohol use, which are also risk factors for oral cavity cancer.
What you can do to lower the risk of a second cancer
Quit smoking
Many of these cancers are linked to tobacco use. In fact, lung cancer, a cancer strongly linked to smoking tobacco, is the most common second cancer in those with a history of mouth or throat cancer.
While it's not easy to do, quitting tobacco can decrease your risk of many health problems, including another cancer. People who quit smoking have a lower risk of lung, esophagus, larynx, hypopharynx, and oral cavity and oropharynx than those who continue to smoke. See Stay Away from Tobacco to learn more about quitting tobacco.
Follow-up after treatment
After completing treatment for cancer of the oral cavity or oropharynx, you should still see your doctor regularly. Your doctor may order tests to look for signs that the cancer has come back or spread. These tests are also useful in finding some second cancers, particularly a new lung cancer or cancer in the mouth or throat. Experts don’t recommend any other tests to look for second cancers in people who don’t have symptoms. Let your doctor know about any changes or problems you notice, because they could be caused by the cancer coming back or by a new disease or second cancer.
Survivors of oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers should follow the American Cancer Society guidelines for the early detection of cancer.
To maintain good health, survivors should also:

Get to and stay at a healthy weight
Keep physically active and limit the time you spend sitting or lying down
Follow a healthy eating pattern that includes plenty of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains, and limits or avoids red and processed meats, sugary drinks, and highly processed foods
Not drink alcohol. If you drink, have no more than 1 drink a day for women or 2 a day for men

These steps can also lower the risk of some other health problems as well as other cancers.
See Second Cancers in Adults to learn more about the causes of second cancers.What is oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancer?
Oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers are cancers that start in the head and neck area.  Cancer that starts in the mouth is called oral cavity cancer. Cancer that starts in the middle part of the throat is called oropharyngeal cancer. These cancers start when cells in the oral cavity or oropharynx grow out of control and crowd out normal cells.
Cancer that starts in the head and neck area can have many different names depending on where the cancer starts. Ask your doctor to write down the exact kind of cancer you have because it can be confusing.
The information after the picture below is about oral cavity and oropharyngeal cancers. If you are not sure where the cancer is, ask your doctor to use these pictures to show you.