Pancreatic cancer is a type of cancer that starts in the pancreas. Pancreatic adenocarcinoma is the most common type of pancreatic cancer. Pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) are a less common type and are discussed in Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors.Pancreatic cancer accounts for about 3% of all cancers in the United States and about 7% of all cancer deaths.Research into the causes, diagnosis, and treatment of pancreatic cancer is underway in many medical centers throughout the world.A risk factor is anything that increases your chance of getting a disease such as cancer. Different cancers have different risk factors. Some risk factors, like smoking, can be changed. Others, like a person’s age or family history of cancer, can’t be changed. Having a risk factor, or even many, does not mean that you will get cancer. And some people who get cancer may have few or no known risk factors.We don’t know what causes pancreatic cancer. But we do know many of the risk factors for this cancer (see Pancreatic Cancer Risk Factors) and how some of them cause cells to become cancerous.There is no sure way to prevent pancreatic cancer. But there are things you can do that might lower your risk.Pancreatic cancer is hard to find early. The pancreas is deep inside the body, so early tumors can’t be seen or felt by health care providers during routine physical exams. People usually have no symptoms until the cancer has become very large or has already spread to other organs.Early pancreatic cancers often do not cause any signs or symptoms. By the time they do cause symptoms, they have often grown very large or already spread outside the pancreas.If a person has signs and symptoms that might be caused by pancreatic cancer, certain exams and tests will be done to find the cause. If cancer is found, more tests will be done to help determine the extent (stage) of the cancer.After someone is diagnosed with pancreatic cancer, doctors will try to figure out if it has spread, and if so, how far. This process is called staging. The stage of a cancer describes how much cancer is in the body. The earliest stage of pancreas cancer is stage 0 (carcinoma in situ), and then ranges from stages I (1) through IV (4). As a rule, the lower the number, the less the cancer has spread. A higher number, such as stage IV, means a more advanced cancer.Survival rates can give you an idea of what percentage of people with the same type and stage of cancer are still alive a certain amount of time (usually 5 years) after they were diagnosed. They can’t tell you how long you will live, but they may help give you a better understanding of how likely it is that your treatment will be successful.It’s important to have honest, open discussions with your cancer care team. They want to answer all your questions, so that you can make informed treatment and life decisions. Here are some questions to consider.Two general types of surgery can be used for pancreatic cancer:

Potentially curative surgery is used when the results of exams and tests suggest that it’s possible to remove (resect) all the cancer.
Palliative surgery may be done if tests show that the cancer is too widespread to be removed completely. This surgery is done to relieve symptoms or to prevent certain complications like a blocked bile duct or intestine, but the goal is not to cure the cancer.Ablation and embolization treatments are different ways of destroying tumors, rather than removing them with surgery. They are used much less often than surgery for pancreatic cancers but can sometimes be used to help treat pancreatic cancer that has spread to other organs, especially the liver.
These treatments will not cure cancers on their own. They are used to help prevent or relieve symptoms, when there are only a few areas of spread, and are often used along with other types of treatment.Radiation therapy uses high-energy x-rays (or particles) to kill cancer cells. It can be helpful in treating some pancreatic cancers.Chemotherapy (chemo) is an anti-cancer drug injected into a vein or taken by mouth. These drugs enter the bloodstream and reach almost all areas of the body, making this treatment potentially useful for cancers whether or not they have spread.As researchers have learned more about the changes in pancreatic cancer cells that help them grow, they have developed newer drugs to specifically target these changes. These targeted drugs work differently from standard chemo drugs. Sometimes they work when standard chemo drugs don’t, and they often have different side effects. (See What’s New in Pancreatic Cancer Research? for more information.)Immunotherapy is the use of medicines to stimulate a person’s own immune system to recognize and destroy cancer cells more effectively. Certain types of immunotherapy can be used to treat pancreatic cancer.Pain can be a major problem for people with pancreatic cancer. These cancers can invade and press on nerves near the pancreas, which can cause pain in the abdomen (belly) or back.
Treatment is available to help relieve this pain. If you are having any pain, please be sure to tell your doctor or nurse. Pain is easier to control if the treatment is started before you first have it. You and your doctor or nurse can talk to you about the best ways to treat your pain. A pain specialist can also help develop a treatment plan.Most of the time, pancreatic cancer is treated based on its resectability – whether the pancreatic tumor has spread to other parts of the body and if it can be completely removed by a surgeon.  Other factors, such as your overall health, can also affect treatment options. Talk to your doctor if you have any questions about the treatment plan they recommend.Completing cancer treatment can be both stressful and exciting. You may be relieved to finish treatment, but find it hard not to worry about cancer coming back. This is very common if you’ve had cancer.
For many people with pancreatic cancer, the cancer may not ever go away completely, or it may come back in another part of the body. These people may get regular treatments with chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or other therapies to help keep the cancer under control for as long as possible. Learning to live with cancer that does not go away can be difficult and very stressful.Pancreatic cancer survivors can be affected by a number of health problems, but often a major concern is facing cancer again. Cancer that comes back after treatment is called a recurrence. But some cancer survivors develop a new, unrelated cancer later. This is called a second cancer.What is pancreatic cancer?
Pancreatic cancer is a type of cancer that starts in the pancreas. It happens when exocrine cells (a type of cell found in the pancreas) start to change and grow out of control, crowding out normal cells.
Your pancreas has 2 jobs:

It makes a substance that helps break down (digest) the food you eat.
it makes hormones that help control the levels of sugar, insulin, and other substances in your blood.

The most common type of pancreatic cancer starts in the type of cells that help break down food (exocrine cells). But there’s another, less common type of pancreatic cancer that starts from the cells that make hormones (endocrine cells).
If you’ve been diagnosed with pancreatic cancer, ask your doctor which type you have. The two types of pancreatic cancer are treated differently and have different outlooks.