Prostate cancer begins when cells in the prostate gland start to grow out of control. The prostate is a gland found only in males. It makes some of the fluid that is part of semen.Other than skin cancer, prostate cancer is the most common cancer in men in the United States.Research into the causes, prevention, detection, testing, and treatment of prostate cancer is being done in many medical centers throughout the world.All men are at risk for developing prostate cancer, but there are factors that can increase your risk. Understanding how these factors apply to you might help you make decisions about screening for prostate cancer.Researchers have found some risk factors for prostate cancer, although it’s not yet clear exactly how these factors might increase prostate cancer risk. On a basic level, prostate cancer is caused by changes in the DNA of a normal prostate cell.Some people inherit changes (mutations) in certain genes that increase their risk of prostate cancer (and possibly other cancers).
Genetic testing can look for mutations in some of these genes. Genetic testing can be helpful in some situations. But not everyone needs to be tested, and it’s important to understand what genetic testing can and can’t tell you before these tests are done.There is no sure way to prevent prostate cancer. Many prostate cancer risk factors, such as age, race, and family history, can’t be controlled. But there are some things you can do that might lower your risk of prostate cancer.Screening is testing to find cancer in people before they have symptoms. For some types of cancer, screening can help find cancers at an early stage, when they are likely to be easier to treat.Screening is testing to find cancer in people before they have symptoms. At this time, it’s not clear if the benefits of prostate cancer screening outweigh the risks for most men. Still, after discussing the pros and cons of screening with their doctors, some men might reasonably choose to be screened.The American Cancer Society recommends that men have a chance to make an informed decision with their health care provider about whether to be screened for prostate cancer. The decision should be made after getting information about the possible benefits, risks, and uncertainties of prostate cancer screening. The discussion about screening should take place at:

Age 50 for men who are at average risk of prostate cancer and are expected to live at least 10 more years
Age 45 for men at high risk of developing prostate cancer. This includes African American men and men who have a first-degree relative (father or brother) diagnosed with prostate cancer at an early age (younger than age 65).
Age 40 for men at even higher risk (those with more than one first-degree relative who had prostate cancer at an early age)

After this discussion, men who want to be screened should get the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) blood test. The digital rectal exam (DRE) may also be done as a part of screening. (See Screening Tests for Prostate Cancer.)
If, after this discussion, a man is unable to decide if testing is right for him, the screening decision can be made by the health care provider, who should take into account the man’s general health preferences and values.
If no prostate cancer is found as a result of screening, the time between future screenings depends on the results of the PSA blood test:

Men who choose to be tested who have a PSA of less than 2.5 ng/mL may only need to be retested every 2 years.
Screening should be done yearly for men whose PSA level is 2.5 ng/mL or higher.

Because prostate cancer often grows slowly, men without symptoms of prostate cancer who have less than a 10-year life expectancy should not be offered prostate cancer screening, because they aren’t likely to benefit from it. Overall health status, and not age alone, is important when making decisions about screening.
Even after a decision about testing has been made, the discussion about the pros and cons of testing should be repeated as new information about the benefits and risks of testing becomes available. Further discussions are also needed to take into account changes in a man’s health, values, and preferences.The American Cancer Society (ACS) supports legislation assuring that men have insurance coverage for prostate screening exams.Most prostate cancers are found early, through screening.
Early prostate cancer usually causes no symptoms. While not common, symptoms of early prostate cancer might include:

Problems urinating, including a slow or weak urinary stream or the need to urinate more often, especially at night
Blood in the urine or semen

Along with the symptoms above, more advanced prostate cancer can sometimes cause other symptoms, such as:

Trouble getting an erection (erectile dysfunction or ED)
Pain in the hips, back (spine), chest (ribs), or other areas, from cancer that has spread to the bones
Weakness or numbness in the legs or feet, or even loss of bladder or bowel control, from cancer in the spine pressing on the spinal cord
Weight loss
Feeling very tired

Most of these symptoms are more likely to be caused by something other than prostate cancer. For example, trouble urinating is much more often caused by benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), a non-cancerous growth of the prostate.
Still, it’s important to tell your health care provider if you have any of these symptoms so that the cause can be found and treated, if needed. Some men might need more tests to check for prostate cancer.Most prostate cancers are first found as a result of screening. (See Screening Tests for Prostate Cancer.) Early prostate cancers usually don’t cause symptoms, but more advanced cancers are sometimes first found because of symptoms they cause.
If prostate cancer is suspected based on results of screening tests or symptoms, tests will be needed to be sure. If you’re seeing your primary care doctor, you might be referred to a urologist, a doctor who treats diseases of the genital and urinary tract, including prostate cancer.
The actual diagnosis of prostate cancer can only be made with a prostate biopsy (discussed below).If you’ve been diagnosed with prostate cancer, your doctors will try to figure out if it has spread, and if so, how far. This process is called staging.The stage of a prostate cancer can give an idea of how serious the cancer is likely to be. However, for localized prostate cancer (cancer that is still just in or around the prostate), doctors also use other ways to determine the risk that the cancer will grow and spread. Knowing this might help a man and his doctor when deciding if the cancer needs to be treated right away, as well as which treatment options might be best.Survival rates can give you an idea of what percentage of people with the same type and stage of cancer are still alive a certain amount of time (usually 5 years) after they were diagnosed.If you've been diagnosed with prostate cancer, it’s important to have honest, open discussions with your cancer care team.Not all prostate cancers are the same. Some can grow quickly, but others tend to grow very slowly. Some men with slow-growing prostate cancers (especially men who are older or have other serious health problems) might never need treatment. Instead, their doctors may recommend active surveillance or observation (sometimes called watchful waiting).Surgery is a common choice to try to cure prostate cancer if it is not thought to have spread outside the prostate gland.Radiation therapy uses high-energy rays or particles to kill cancer cells.Ablative treatments use extreme heat or cold or other methods to destroy (ablate) prostate tissue, rather than removing it with surgery or treating it with radiation.Hormone therapy is also called androgen deprivation therapy (ADT). The goal of this treatment is to reduce levels of male hormones, called androgens, in the body, or to stop them from fueling prostate cancer cell growth. Several types of hormone therapy can be used to treat prostate cancer.Chemotherapy (chemo) uses anti-cancer drugs injected into a vein or taken by mouth to reach cancer cells in most parts of the body.Immunotherapy is the use of medicines to stimulate a person’s own immune system to recognize and destroy cancer cells more effectively. Certain types of immunotherapy can be used to treat prostate cancer.As researchers have learned more about some of the changes inside prostate cancer cells that help them grow, they have developed newer types of drugs that target these changes.If prostate cancer spreads (metastasizes) to other parts of the body, it nearly always goes to the bones first. If the cancer has grown outside the prostate, a major goal of treatment is preventing or slowing the spread of the cancer to the bones. If the cancer has already reached the bones, controlling or relieving pain and other complications is also a very important part of treatment.The stage of your cancer is one of the most important factors in choosing the best way to treat it. Prostate cancer is staged based on the extent of the cancer (using T, N, and M categories) and the PSA level and Gleason score (Grade Group) when it is first diagnosed.A man’s prostate-specific antigen (PSA) blood level is often a good indicator of how effective treatment has been.If you’ve been treated for prostate cancer and your prostate-specific antigen (PSA) blood level or another test shows that your prostate cancer has not been cured or has come back (recurred), further treatment can often still be helpful.For most men diagnosed with prostate cancer, the cancer is found while it’s still at an early stage, when it’s small and hasn’t spread beyond the prostate gland. These men often have several treatment options to consider.For most men with prostate cancer, treatment can remove or destroy the cancer. Completing treatment can be both stressful and exciting. You may be relieved to finish treatment, but find it hard not to worry about cancer growing or coming back. This is very common if you’ve had cancer.
For some men, the cancer may come back in other parts of the body, or it may never go away completely. These men may get hormone therapy or other treatments to help keep the cancer under control for as long as possible and to help with any symptoms they’re having. Learning to live with cancer that does not go away can be difficult and very stressful.What is prostate cancer?
Cancer can start any place in the body. Prostate cancer starts in the prostate gland, when cells in the prostate grow out of control.
Prostate cancer cells can sometimes spread to other parts of the body, such as the bones or other organs, and grow there. This spread is called metastasis.
Even if prostate cancer spreads to the bones (or any other place), the cancer cells there are still prostate cancer cells.