Salivary gland cancer starts in one of the salivary glands. There are several different salivary glands inside and near your mouth. Benign (non-cancer) and malignant (cancer) tumors can develop in these glands. Compared to other types of head and neck cancers, salivary gland cancers are rare.
The salivary glands
The salivary glands are organs on each side of the face. They make saliva (spit), the lubricating fluid found in the mouth and throat. Saliva has enzymes that begin the process of digesting (breaking down) food. It also has antibodies and other substances that help prevent infections of the mouth and throat.
The 2 main types of salivary glands are: major  and minor.
Major salivary glands

The parotid glands. These are the largest salivary glands and are just in front of the ears. Most salivary gland tumors start here. Most of these tumors are benign (not cancer), but the parotid glands are still where most malignant (cancer) salivary gland tumors start.
The submandibular glands. These major salivary glands are smaller than the parotid glands and sit below the jaw. They make saliva which comes out under the tongue.
The sublingual glands. These salivary glands are the smallest of the major salivary glands and sit under the floor of the mouth and below either side of the tongue.How common are salivary gland cancers?
Salivary gland cancers are not very common, making up 6% to 8%  of all head and neck cancers in the United States. There are about 2,000 to 2,500 cases in the US each year. They occur at a rate of about 3 cases per 100,000 people per year in the Western world.
Who gets salivary gland cancer?
These cancers can occur in people of almost any age, but they become more common as people get older. The average age of people when they are diagnosed is 55.
Where are most salivary gland cancers found?
Most salivary gland cancers are found in the parotid glands, followed by the submandibular, sublingual, and minor salivary glands.A lot of research on the causes and treatment of salivary gland cancer is being done in medical centers world-wide . This is a challenging disease to study because it’s quite rare and there are many types of salivary gland cancer. But each year, scientists find out more about the disease and how to better treat it.
Gene changes in salivary gland cancers
Studies have found certain gene changes in various types of salivary gland cancers. Researchers are learning more about how these changes can cause salivary gland cells to become cancer. They are also finding out that some of these gene changes can be targeted by specific drugs for treatment.
For example, in adenoid cystic cancers, a mutation in the NOTCH1 gene appears to make this cancer more aggressive and have a higher chance of cancer spread. But this also means that salivary gland cancers with this NOTCH1 mutation might respond to a category of drugs called NOTCH1 inhibitors. Some secretory cancers have an ETV6-NTRK3 fusion gene that makes TRK inhibitors a possible treatment option. More research is being done to test targeted drugs against gene changes in different types of salivary gland cancers.
As scientists learn more about these gene changes in salivary gland cancer cells, they hope to develop new targeted treatments that work better and cause fewer side effects. Someday these cell changes may also be used to diagnose salivary cancers, predict outcomes, and make treatment choices.
Treatment of salivary gland cancers
Surgery
With advances in surgical techniques, teams of head and neck surgeons and neurosurgeons can now remove small tumors and tumors near key structures, such as cancers that have spread near the base of the skull. These operations are becoming more common and successful.
Reconstructive surgery is becoming more sophisticated and successful, too. This lets surgeons do more extensive surgery to remove the cancer and improves patients’ quality of life after treatment.
Radiation therapy
New ways of giving radiation therapy now allow more precise targeting of radiation. Intraoperative radiation, where radiation is given right to the tumor site during surgery, is being studied as a better way to treat salivary gland tumors that are likely to come back. This may help when treating tumors that are close to nerves or big blood vessels and only limited surgery can be done.
Chemotherapy
Since salivary gland cancer is rare and there are so many types, knowledge about treating these cancers that have spread (stage 4) with chemotherapy (chemo) is still changing.
In general, chemotherapy does not work very well to treat salivary gland cancers. Most of the information using chemotherapy in stage 4 salivary gland cancer comes from treatment of other types of head and neck cancers.
Another area of interest is the use of chemo along with radiation after surgery in people at high risk of the cancer coming back (for example, those with cancer in the lymph nodes or a large tumor invading nearby structures).
Chemo drugs, often given along with radiation, continue to be studied in clinical trials.
Targeted therapy
As researchers have learned more about the gene changes in cells that cause cancer, they have been able to develop drugs that specifically target these changes. These targeted drugs work differently from standard chemotherapy drugs. They sometimes work when chemo drugs don’t, and they often have different (and sometimes less severe) side effects.
Studies have identified gene changes in some salivary gland cancer cells that help the cancer grow and spread. Some of these changes affect proteins that can be blocked by targeted drugs that are already used to treat other types of cancer. So far these drugs are used in cases of advanced salivary gland cancer and the tumor must be tested for specific proteins or genes before the drug can be tried. See Targeted Drug Therapy
Hormone therapy
Early research has found that some salivary gland tumors have too many receptors (proteins) for male hormones called androgens. Drugs that block these receptors or lower hormone levels, such as bicalutamide or leuprolide, appear to be helpful in treating these tumors.
Treating side effects of salivary gland cancer treatment
Even with better radiation and surgical techniques, some people still have long-term side effects, like dry mouth, from treatment for their salivary gland cancer. Photobiomodulation therapy (PBMT)  has been investigated to help with this common side effect of salivary gland cancer treatment. It is a low-level laser therapy that is applied to the salivary glands and initial studies have shown some success in people with dry mouth. More studies are needed to show that this therapy is helpful for this side effect.
Other studies are looking at different types of prevention and treatment of dry mouth including new medicines, acupuncture, hyperbaric oxygen, submandibular gland transfer, and increasing saliva production through stimulation of the taste buds and by chewing.A risk factor is anything that increases your chance of getting a disease such as cancer. Different cancers have different risk factors. Some risk factors, like smoking, can be changed; others, like a person’s age or family history, can’t.
But having a risk factor, or even many, does not mean that you will get the disease. And many people who get the disease may have few or no known risk factors.
A few risk factors are known to make a person more likely to develop salivary gland cancer, but most salivary gland cancers start without any clear cause.
Older age
The risk of salivary gland cancer goes up as people get older.
Radiation exposure
Radiation treatment to the head and neck area for other medical reasons increases your risk of salivary gland cancer, especially if your salivary glands were not protected during the radiation.
Workplace exposure to certain radioactive substances may also increase the risk of salivary gland cancer.
Smoking
Smoking cigarettes has been linked to a higher risk of Warthin tumor, a benign salivary gland tumor, but not other types of salivary gland cancers.  
Other possible risk factors
Certain workplace exposures
Some studies have suggested that people who work with certain metals (nickel alloy dust) or minerals (silica dust), and people who work in asbestos mining, plumbing, rubber products manufacturing, and some types of woodworking may be at increased risk for salivary gland cancer, but these links are not certain. The rarity of these cancers makes this hard to study.
Viral infections
Some viral infections might be associated with certain salivary gland tumors.
Certain high-risk types of human papillomavirus (HPV) has been found in some mucoepidermoid cancers, but more studies are needed to say for sure if there is a link. Vaccines to help prevent HPV infection are available and can help prevent six types of HPV-related cancers.
People with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) are also at risk for salivary gland cancers. This could be because people with HIV have weakened immune systems, but more research is needed.
Lymphoepithelial cancer, a very rare type of salivary gland cancer, is associated with the Epstein-Barr virus.
Diet
Some studies have found that a diet low in vegetables and high in animal fat might increase the risk of salivary gland cancer, but more research is needed to confirm this possible link.
Cell phone use
One study has suggested an increased risk of parotid gland tumors among heavy cell phone users. In this study, most of the tumors seen were benign (not cancer). Other studies looking at this issue have not found such a link. Research is still being done in this area.Although we know a few things that can raise a person’s risk of salivary gland cancer, it’s not clear exactly what causes most of these cancers. And while there is no clear relationship between certain genes and the development of salivary cancers, here is some information that might be helpful.
DNA is the chemical in our cells that makes up our genes, which control how our cells work. We look like our parents because they are the source of our DNA. But DNA affects more than just how we look. It also can influence our risk for developing certain diseases, such as some kinds of cancer.
Some genes control when cells grow, divide, and die: 

Genes that help cells grow, divide, and stay alive are called proto-oncogenes. If something causes a proto-oncogene to mutate (change), the gene becomes abnormal and is then called an oncogene. 
Genes that help keep cell growth under control or make cells die at the right time are called tumor suppressor genes.

Cancers can be caused by DNA mutations (gene changes) that turn on oncogenes or turn off tumor suppressor genes. This leads to cells growing out of control. Changes in many different genes are usually needed to cause salivary gland cancer.
Researchers don’t yet know all of the DNA changes that result in salivary gland cancer, but they have found some gene changes that are often found in these cancers.

Most mucoepidermoid cancers have the MECT1-MAML2 fusion oncogene
More than half of adenoid cystic salivary gland cancers have the MYB-NFIB oncogene

Identifying these gene changes is helping to find new targeted drug therapies for some salivary gland cancers.
For more about how gene changes can lead to cancer, see Genes and Cancer.
Inherited and acquired gene mutations: Salivary gland cancer does not usually run in families, so most of the DNA changes that lead to this cancer are not likely to be inherited from a person’s parents.
Gene changes related to these cancers usually happen during a person’s lifetime, rather than being inherited. These acquired mutations often result from exposure to cancer-causing chemicals, like those found in tobacco smoke or chemicals at work, but others might just be random events that happen inside cells, without having an outside cause. Several different gene changes are probably needed for cancer to develop, and not all of these changes are understood at this time.
Inherited mutations of oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes rarely cause these cancers, but some people seem to inherit a poor ability to detoxify (break down) certain types of cancer-causing chemicals. These people are more sensitive to the cancer-causing effects of tobacco smoke, and certain industrial chemicals.Because we don’t know what causes most salivary gland cancers, we don’t yet know how to prevent many of them.
Avoid exposure to certain infections
Certain viral infections, such as Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and human papillomavirus (HPV), might be linked to an increased risk of salivary gland cancers. Avoiding exposure to these viruses might help lower your risk. And although more research is needed to understand finding HPV in some salivary gland cancers, there are vaccines available to help prevent 6 HPV-related cancers.
Avoid tobacco
Even though smoking cigarettes has been linked to certain types of benign salivary gland tumor, avoiding tobacco might also help lower your risk of other tobacco related cancers including other head and neck cancers and lung cancer, as well as many other diseases.
Avoid certain workplace exposures
For people who work in certain industries linked with an increased risk of salivary gland cancer, taking precautions to protect themselves might help lower their risk.Is there a screening test for salivary gland cancer?﻿
Salivary gland cancer is not common, so doctors usually do not test for it unless someone has symptoms. There is also no routine screening test or program recommended by any major medical organization for people at average risk.
But, people who might be at higher risk of developing salivary gland cancer because they have had radiation to the head and neck area might be watched more closely.
Is salivary gland cancer ever found early?
In many cases, because of its location, salivary gland cancer can be found early. Often patients, their dentists, or their doctors notice a lump in one of the salivary glands (usually on the sides of the face or in the mouth). Checking the salivary glands for tumors is sometimes done as part of a general medical or dental check-up.
Being alert to possible signs and symptoms of salivary gland cancers and not ignoring them might help find these cancers early, when treatment is likely to be most successful.The major salivary glands are on each side of the face and below the tongue. Several important nerves and other structures run through or near salivary glands and can be affected by salivary tumors.
Possible signs and symptoms of salivary gland cancer include:

A lump or swelling in your mouth, cheek, jaw, or neck
Pain in your mouth, cheek, jaw, ear, or neck that does not go away
A recent difference between the size and/or shape of the left and right sides of your face or neck
Numbness in part of your face
Weakness of the muscles on one side of your face
Trouble opening your mouth widely
Trouble swallowing

Many of these signs and symptoms can also be caused by benign (non-cancer) salivary gland tumors or by other conditions. Still, if you have any of these problems, it’s important to see your doctor right away so the cause can be found and treated, if needed.Salivary gland cancer is most often diagnosed when a person goes to a doctor because of symptoms they are having.
If you have signs or symptoms that might be caused by a salivary gland tumor, your doctor will examine you and order tests to find out if they're being caused by cancer or some other condition. If cancer is found, more tests may be done.
Medical history and physical exam
Usually the first step is to ask you questions about your medical history. The doctor will ask about your symptoms and when they first appeared. You might also be asked about your possible risk factors for salivary gland cancer and about your general health.
During the physical exam, your doctor will carefully examine your mouth and the areas on the sides of your face and around your ears and jaw. The doctor will feel for enlarged lymph nodes (lumps under the skin) in your neck.
The doctor will also check for numbness or weakness in your face (which can happen if cancer spreads into nerves).
Complete head and neck exam
If there is a reason to think you might have cancer, your doctor will refer you to a specialist. These specialists are oral and maxillofacial surgeons or head and neck surgeons. They are also known as ear, nose, and throat (ENT) doctors or otolaryngologists. The specialist will most likely do a complete head and neck exam, as well as order other exams and tests.
The specialist will pay careful attention to the head and neck area, being sure to look and feel for any abnormal areas. This exam will include the lymph nodes in your neck, which will be checked carefully for any swelling.
Because salivary glands are throughout the mouth and throat, some are deep inside the neck and some parts that are not easy to see. The doctor may use mirrors or special fiber-optic scopes to look at these areas. These exams can be done in the doctor’s office. The doctor may first spray the back of your throat with numbing medicine to help make the exam easier.

Indirect pharyngoscopy and laryngoscopy: Small mirrors on long, thin handles are used to look at your throat, the base of your tongue, and part of the larynx (voice box).
Direct (flexible) pharyngoscopy and laryngoscopy: A flexible fiber-optic scope (called an endoscope) is put in through your mouth or nose to look at areas that can’t easily be seen with mirrors. It can get a clearer look at areas of change that were seen with the mirrors and also the part behind the nose (nasopharynx) and the larynx (voice box).

Types of salivary gland biopsies
Symptoms and the results of exams or imaging tests may strongly suggest you have salivary gland cancer, but the actual diagnosis is made on﻿ a biopsy sample by a pathologist (a doctor who specializes in diagnosing and classifying cancer by testing and looking at cells in the lab). Different types of biopsies might be done, depending on the situation.
Fine needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy
An FNA biopsy takes a small amount of cells and fluid from a lump or tumor for testing. This type of biopsy can be done in a doctor’s office or clinic. It’s done with a thin, hollow needle much like those used for routine blood tests.
Your doctor may first numb the area over the tumor. The doctor then puts the needle right into the tumor and pulls cells and a few drops of fluid into a syringe. The sample is then sent to a lab, where it’s checked for cancer cells.
Doctors may use FNA biopsy if they are not sure whether a lump is a salivary gland cancer. The FNA biopsy might show the lump is caused by an infection, a benign (non-cancer) salivary tumor, or a salivary gland cancer. FNA biopsies are sometimes done on a lump in the salivary gland or on a suspicious lymph node in the neck. In some cases, this type of biopsy can help a person avoid unnecessary surgery.
An FNA biopsy is only helpful if enough cells are taken out to check. But sometimes not enough cells are removed, or the biopsy is read as negative (normal) even when the tumor is cancer. If the doctor is not sure about the FNA biopsy results, a different type of biopsy might be needed to get more cells and tissue.
Core needle biopsy
Sometimes, if the FNA biopsy is not able to get enough cells to test, the doctor might do a core needle biopsy that uses a hollow needle to take out pieces of tissue from a suspicious area. The needle may be attached to a spring-loaded tool that moves the needle in and out of the tissue quickly, or it may be attached to a suction device that helps pull tissue into the needle. Often an ultrasound is used to guide the needle.
A small cylinder (core) of tissue is taken out in the needle. Several cores are often removed and sent to the lab to be tested. 
Incisional biopsy
This type of biopsy may sometimes be done if the FNA biopsy didn't get a large enough sample. The biopsy can be done either in the doctor’s office or in the operating room, depending on where the tumor is and how easy it is to get a good tissue sample. In this procedure, the surgeon numbs the area over the tumor, makes a small incision (cut) with a scalpel (small knife) and takes out a tiny piece of the tumor. If the tumor is deep inside the mouth or throat, the biopsy might be done in the operating room while you are in a deep sleep under general anesthesia and then sent to the lab to be tested. These types of biopsies are not done often for salivary gland tumors.
Surgery
As mentioned above, FNA biopsy of a suspected salivary gland cancer may not always provide a clear answer. If this is the case but the physical exam and imaging tests suggest that it is cancer, the doctor may advise surgery to remove the tumor completely. This can give enough of a sample for a diagnosis and treat the tumor at the same time (see Surgery for Salivary Gland Cancer for more information).
In some cases, if the exams and tests suggest cancer, the doctor may skip the FNA biopsy altogether and go directly to surgery to remove the tumor. The entire tissue sample that is removed is then sent to the lab to confirm the diagnosis.
Lab tests on salivary gland biopsy samples
All biopsy samples are sent to a lab to be checked by a pathologist, a doctor who is specially trained to diagnose cancer from a biopsy. The doctor can usually tell cancer cells from normal cells, as well as what type of cancer it is, by the way the cells look. In some cases, the doctor may need to test the cells with special stains to help find out what type of salivary gland cancer it is.
For certain types of salivary gland cancers that have spread, molecular tests to look for certain proteins or genes changes might be done to help choose targeted drugs or immunotherapy drugs for treatment. For example:

Androgen receptor: This is a protein on some salivary gland cancer cells that androgens (male hormones) bind to and help the cancer grow. Drugs that target these proteins and help slow the tumor growth are called anti-androgens.
HER2: This is a protein on the outside of some salivary gland cancer cells that helps the cancer grow. These cancers are usually treated with drugs that target HER2.
NTRK fusion gene: This is a gene change in one of the NTRK genes. Cells with these gene changes can lead to abnormal cell growth and cancer. There are targeted drugs available that go after cells with NTRK gene changes.
Tumor mutational burden (TMB): TMB is a measure of the number of gene mutations (changes) inside the cancer cells. Cancer cells that have many gene mutations (a high TMB or TMB-H) might be more likely to be recognized as abnormal and attacked by the body’s immune system. If your cancer tissue is tested and found to have a high TMB (TMB-H), treatment with a certain immunotherapy drug might be an option.

Imaging tests for salivary gland cancer
Imaging tests use x-rays, magnetic fields, or radioactive particles to create pictures of the inside of your body. Imaging tests might be done for a number of reasons, before and after a cancer diagnosis, including:

To help find a suspicious area that might be cancer
To learn how far cancer may have spread
To help find out if treatment has been effective
To look for signs that the cancer has come back (recurred) after treatment.

X-rays
If you have a lump or swelling near your jaw, your doctor might order x-rays of your jaws and teeth to look for a tumor.
If you've been diagnosed with cancer, an x-ray of your chest might be done to see if the cancer has spread to your lungs. More often though, a CT scan of the lungs is done since they tend to give more detailed pictures.
Sometimes, panoramic dental x-rays might be done if radiation or certain types of surgery, like a mandibulectomy, are planned.
Computed tomography (CT or CAT) scan
A CT scan uses x-rays to make detailed cross-sectional images of your body. A CT scan can show the size, shape, and exact location of a tumor and can help find enlarged lymph nodes that might have cancer. CT scans can also be used to look for tumor spread in other parts of the body, like the lungs.
CT-guided needle biopsy: If a biopsy is needed of a certain area to check for cancer spread, a CT scan can be used to guide the biopsy needle into the mass (lump) to get a tissue sample to check for cancer.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan
Like CT scans, MRI scans make detailed images of soft tissues in the body. But MRI scans use radio waves and strong magnets instead of x-rays. A contrast material called gadolinium is often injected into a vein before the scan to make pictures clearer.
MRI scans can help determine the exact location and extent of a tumor (for example, if it is growing into nearby tissues). If you have weakness or numbness of your face, an MRI scan can help see if any of the nearby nerves or muscles are affected by cancer or if the cancer is close to the skull bone. MRI scans are also helpful to look for cancer spread to the brain or spinal cord.
Positron emission tomography (PET) scan
For a PET scan, ﻿a slightly radioactive form of sugar (known as FDG) is injected into the blood and collects mainly in cancer cells.
PET/CT scan: Often a PET scan is combined with a CT scan using a special machine that can do both scans at the same time. This lets the doctor compare areas of higher radioactivity on the PET scan with the more detailed picture on the CT scan.
PET/CT scans for salivary gland cancer might be done:

If CT or MRI scans cannot find the main tumor
To help plan surgery
To help find the lymph nodes in the neck with cancer if radiation is the main treatment, instead of surgery.
To look for cancer spread to distant parts of the body

Ultrasound
An ultrasound uses sound waves and their echoes to create images of the inside of the body. A small microphone-like instrument called a transducer gives off sound waves and picks up the echoes as they bounce off organs. The echoes are converted by a computer into an image on a screen. Ultrasounds can often be done of the major salivary glands and might be used to get a biopsy of a suspicious area. 
Neck ultrasound and biopsy: For this exam, a technician moves the transducer along the skin over your neck. This type of ultrasound can be used to look for lymph nodes in the neck to see if they are swollen or if they look abnormal inside which could be a sign of cancer spread. The ultrasound can also help guide a needle into the abnormal lymph node for an FNA biopsy. It might also be used after treatment to look for signs of cancer coming back (recurrence).
Quit smoking before treatment
It is very important to quit smoking  before any treatment for salivary gland cancer. If you quit smoking cigarettes before being diagnosed, it is important to not restart during treatment. Smoking during treatment can cause:

Poor wound healing, especially after surgery
More side effects from chemo
Radiation to not work as well
A higher chance of getting an infection
Longer stays in the hospital
A greater chance of dying 

Tests after salivary gland cancer is diagnosed
Other tests might be done as part of a work-up if a patient has been diagnosed with salivary gland cancer. These tests are not used to diagnose the cancer, but they may be done for other reasons, such as to see if a person is healthy enough for treatments such as surgery, radiation therapy, or chemotherapy.
Blood tests
No blood test can diagnose cancer in the salivary glands. Still, your doctor may order routine blood tests to get an idea of your overall health, especially before treatment. Such tests can help diagnose poor nutrition and low blood cell counts.

A complete blood count (CBC) looks at whether your blood has normal amounts of different types of blood cells. For example, it can show if you are anemic (have a low number of red blood cells). 
Blood chemistry tests can help determine how well your liver or kidneys are working. 

Heart and lung tests before surgery
If surgery is planned, you might also have an electrocardiogram (EKG) to make sure your heart is working well. Some people having surgery also may need breathing tests, called pulmonary (lung) function tests (PFTs).
Dental exam before radiation or surgery treatment
If radiation therapy or certain types of surgery (for example, removal of part of the jawbone) will be part of the treatment, you'll most likely be asked to see a dentist before starting. The dentist will help with routine dental care and dental x-rays, and may remove any bad teeth, if needed, before radiation treatment is started or surgery is done. Radiation can damage the saliva (spit) glands and cause dry mouth. This can increase the chance of cavities, infection, and breakdown of the jawbone.
Hearing tests
Cisplatin, a chemotherapy drug sometimes used to treat salivary gland cancer can cause hearing loss. You will most likely have your hearing checked (with an audiogram) before starting treatment to compare to later if you happen to have hearing problems from this chemo drug.
Nutrition and speech tests
Often, you will have a nutritionist who will evaluate your nutrition status before, during, and after your treatment to try and keep your weight and protein stores as normal as possible. You might also visit a speech therapist who will test your ability to swallow and speak. They might give you exercises to do during treatment to help strengthen the muscles in the head and neck area so you can eat and talk easily after treatment.After someone is diagnosed with salivary gland cancer, doctors will try to figure out if it has spread, and if so, how far. This process is called staging. The stage of a cancer describes how much cancer is in the body. It helps determine how serious the cancer is and how best to treat it. Doctors also use a cancer's stage when talking about survival statistics (prognosis).
The earliest-stage salivary gland cancers are stage 0 (carcinoma in situ), and then stages range from I (1) through IV (4). As a rule, the lower the number, the less the cancer has spread. A higher number, such as stage IV, means cancer has spread more. Although each person’s cancer experience is unique, cancers with similar stages tend to have a similar outlook (prognosis) and are often treated in much the same way.
How is the stage determined?
The staging system most often used for salivary gland cancers is the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) TNM system, which is based on 3 key pieces of information:

The extent of the tumor (T): How large is the cancer? Has it grown into nearby structures?
The spread to nearby lymph nodes (N): Has the cancer spread to nearby lymph nodes?
The spread (metastasis) to distant sites (M): Has the cancer spread to distant organs such as the lungs?

Numbers or letters after T, N, and M provide more details about each of these factors. Higher numbers mean the cancer is more advanced. Once a person’s T, N, and M categories have been determined, this information is combined in a process called stage grouping to assign an overall stage. For more information see Cancer Staging.
The staging system in the table is the pathologic stage (also called the surgical stage). It is determined by examining tissue removed during an operation. Sometimes, if surgery is not possible right away or at all, the cancer will be given a clinical stage instead. This is based on the results of a physical exam, biopsy, and imaging tests. The clinical stage will be used to help plan treatment. Sometimes, though, the cancer has spread further than the clinical stage estimates, and may not predict the patient’s outlook as accurately as a pathologic stage.
The system described here is the most recent AJCC system, effective January 2018.
Salivary gland cancer staging can be complex, so ask your doctor to explain it to you in a way you understand. 



AJCC stage
Stage grouping
Stage description*


0
Tis N0 M0
The cancer is confined to the cells lining the salivary duct (Tis). It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes (N0) or distant sites (M0). This stage is also known as carcinoma in situ (Tis).


I
T1 N0 M0
The cancer is 2 cm (about ¾ inch) or smaller. It’s not growing into nearby tissues (T1). It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes (N0) or to distant sites (M0).


  II
T2 N0 M0
The cancer is larger than 2 cm but no larger than 4 cm (about 1½ inch). It’s not growing into nearby tissues (T2). It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes (N0) or to distant sites (M0).


III  
T3 N0 M0
The cancer is larger than 4 cm and/or is growing into nearby soft tissues (T3). It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes (N0) or to distant sites (M0).


OR


T0, T1, T2, T3 N1 M0
The cancer is any size and might have grown into nearby soft tissues (T0-T3) AND has spread to 1 lymph node on the same side of the head or neck as the primary tumor. The cancer has not grown outside the lymph node and the lymph node is no larger than 3 cm (about 1¼ inch) (N1). It has not spread to distant sites (M0).


IVA
T4a N0 or N1 M0
The cancer is any size and is growing into nearby structures such as the jaw-bone, skin, ear canal, and/or facial nerve. This is known as moderately advanced disease T4a) AND:

It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes (N0) OR 
It has spread to 1 lymph node on the same side of the head or neck as the primary tumor, but has not grown outside of the lymph node and the lymph node is no larger than 3 cm (about 1¼ inch) (N1).
 It has not spread to distant sites (M0).


OR


T0, T1, T2, T3 or T4a N2 M0
The cancer is any size and might have grown into nearby soft tissues or structures such as the jawbone, skin, ear canal, and/or facial nerve (T0-T4a) AND any of the following:

It has spread to 1 lymph node on the same side as the primary tumor but has not grown outside of the lymph node and the lymph node is larger than 3 cm but not larger than 6 cm (about 2½ inches) (N2a) OR
It has spread to 1 lymph node that is 3 cm or smaller and the cancer has grown outside of the lymph node (N2a) OR
It has spread to more than 1 lymph node on the same side as the primary tumor, but it has not grown outside of any of the lymph nodes and none of the lymph nodes are larger than 6 cm (N2b) OR
It has spread to 1 or more lymph nodes, either on the opposite side of the primary tumor or on both sides of the neck, but has not grown outside any of the lymph nodes and none are larger than 6 cm (N2c).
 It has not spread to distant organs (M0).


  IVB
Any T N3 M0
The cancer is any size and might have grown into nearby soft tissues or structures (Any T) AND any of the following:

it has spread to a lymph node that is larger than 6 cm but has not grown outside of the lymph node (N3a) OR
it has spread to a lymph node that is larger than 3 cm and has clearly grown outside the lymph node (N3b) OR
it has spread to more than one lymph node on the same side, the opposite side, or both sides of the primary cancer with growth outside of the lymph node(s) (N3b) OR
it has spread to a lymph node on the opposite side of the primary cancer that is 3 cm or smaller and has grown outside of the lymph node (N3b). 
 It has not spread to distant organs (M0).


OR


T4b Any N M0
The cancer is any size and is growing into nearby structures such as the base of the skull or other bones nearby, or it surrounds the carotid artery. This is known as very advanced disease (T4b). It might or might not have spread to nearby lymph nodes (Any N). It has not spread to distant organs (M0).


IVC
Any T Any N M1
The cancer is any size and may have grown into nearby soft tissues or structures (Any T) AND it might or might not have spread to nearby lymph nodes (Any N). It has spread to distant sites such as the lungs (M1).



* The following additional categories are not listed on the table above: 

TX: Main tumor cannot be assessed due to lack of information.
T0: No evidence of a primary tumor. The N categories are described in the table above, except for:
NX: Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed due to lack of information.Survival rates can give you an idea of what percentage of people with the same type and stage of cancer are still alive a certain amount of time (usually 5 years) after they were diagnosed. They can’t tell you how long you will live, but they may help give you a better understanding of how likely it is that your treatment will be successful.
Keep in mind that survival rates are estimates and are often based on previous outcomes of large numbers of people who had a specific cancer, but they can’t predict what will happen in any particular person’s case. These statistics can be confusing and may lead you to have more questions. Talk with your doctor, who is familiar with your situation, about how these numbers may apply to you. 
What is a 5-year relative survival rate?
A relative survival rate compares people with the same type and stage of salivary gland cancer to people in the overall population. For example, if the 5-year relative survival rate for a specific stage of salivary gland cancer is 90%, it means that people who have that cancer are, on average, about 90% as likely as people who don’t have that cancer to live for at least 5 years after being diagnosed.
Where do these survival numbers come from?
The American Cancer Society relies on information from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database, maintained by the National Cancer Institute (NCI), to provide survival statistics for different types of cancer.
The SEER database tracks 5-year relative survival rates for salivary gland cancer in the United States, based on how far the cancer has spread. The SEER database, however, does not group cancers by AJCC TNM stages (stage 1, stage 2, stage 3, etc.). Instead, it groups cancers into localized, regional, and distant stages:

Localized: There is no sign that the cancer has spread outside of the salivary gland.
Regional: The cancer is very large or has spread outside the salivary gland to nearby structures or lymph nodes.
Distant: The cancer has spread to distant parts of the body such as the lungs.

5-year relative survival rates for salivary gland cancer
(Based on people diagnosed with salivary gland cancer between 2012 and 2018.)



SEER Stage
5-year Relative Survival Rate


Localized
94%


Regional
70%


Distant
43%


All SEER stages combined
76%



Understanding the numbers

People being diagnosed with salivary gland cancer now may have a better outlook than these numbers show. Treatments improve over time, and these numbers are based on people who were diagnosed and treated at least 5 years earlier.
These numbers apply only to the stage of the cancer when it is first diagnosed. They do not apply later on if the cancer grows, spreads, or comes back after treatment.
These numbers don’t take everything into account. Survival rates are grouped based on how far the cancer has spread, but your age and overall health, how well the cancer responds to treatment, your smoking and alcohol habits, and other factors can also affect your outlook.It’s important to have honest, open discussions with your cancer care team. They want to answer all your questions, so that you can make informed treatment and life decisions.
Other health care professionals, such as dietitians and social workers, can also answer some of your questions. You can find more tips about speaking with your health care team in The Doctor-Patient Relationship.
Not all of these questions may apply to you, but asking the ones that do may be helpful. Along with these examples, be sure to write down some of your own. For instance, you might want more information about your recovery time so you can plan your work schedule. Consider these questions to get you started.
When you’re told you have salivary gland cancer

What kind of salivary gland cancer do I have?
Which salivary gland is affected?
Is the cancer high grade (likely to grow and spread quickly) or low grade (slower growing)?
Has the cancer spread beyond where it started?
What is the stage of the cancer, and what does that mean?
Will I need other tests before we can decide on treatment?
Do I need to see any other doctors or health professionals?
If the cancer is stage 4, has it been tested for certain proteins or gene changes to help figure out my treatment options?
If I’m concerned about the costs and insurance coverage for my diagnosis and treatment, who can help me?
Is there a clinical trial available you think I should get more information on?

When you're deciding on a treatment for salivary gland cancer

How much experience do you have treating this type of cancer?
Should I get a second opinion? How do I do that? Can you recommend a doctor or cancer center?
What are my treatment options? What treatment do you recommend and why?
What’s the goal of the treatment?
Will this treatment affect the way I look? If so, what are my options for reconstruction? 
What if I have transportation problems getting to and from treatment?
What are the chances these treatments wilI cure this cancer ?
How quickly do I need to decide on treatment?
What should I do to be ready for treatment?
Will I need a feeding tube before starting treatment?
How long will treatment last? What will it be like? Where will it be done?
What risks or side effects should I expect from the treatments you suggest? Are there things I can do to reduce these side effects?
Is treatment likely to affect my speech or swallowing? Is there anything I can do to help minimize this?
How will treatment affect my daily activities? Can I still work full time?
What are my options if the treatment doesn’t work or if the cancer comes back (recurs)?

During treatment for salivary gland cancer

How will I know if the treatment is working?
Is there anything I can do to help manage side effects?
What symptoms or side effects should I tell you about right away?
How can I reach you on nights, holidays, or weekends?
Do I need to change what I eat during treatment?
Are there any limits on what I can do or what I can eat?
Can I exercise during treatment? If so, what kind should I do, and how often?
Can you suggest a mental health professional I can see if I start to feel overwhelmed, depressed, or distressed?
What if I need social support during treatment because my family lives far away?

After treatment for salivary gland cancer

Will I need a special diet after treatment?
Are there any limits on what I can do?
What symptoms should I watch for?
What kind of exercise should I do now?
What type of follow-up will I need after treatment?
How often will I need to have follow-up exams and imaging tests?
When should I have my next endoscopy?
Will I need any blood tests?
How will we know if the cancer has come back? What should I watch for?
What will my options be if the cancer comes back?Studies have shown that people with head and neck cancer who are treated at facilities that perform a lot of head and neck cancer surgeries, tend to live longer. Because of this and the complex nature of these operations, it’s very important to have a surgeon and cancer center with experience treating these cancers. 
Surgery is often the main treatment for salivary gland cancers. Your cancer will probably be treated with surgery if the doctor believes that it can be removed completely. That is, if it is resectable. Whether or not a cancer is resectable depends largely on how far it has grown into nearby structures, but it also depends on the skill and experience of the surgeon. Choosing a surgeon who has treated many patients with salivary gland cancer gives you the best chance of having your cancer removed completely. This gives you the best chance of being cured.
In most cases, the cancer and some or all of the surrounding salivary gland will be removed. Nearby soft tissue may be taken out too. The goal is to have no cancer cells on the outside edges (margin) of the removed surgical tissue which contains the cancer. If the cancer is high grade (more likely to grow and spread quickly) or if it has already spread to lymph nodes, lymph nodes might be removed in an operation called a neck dissection (described below).
Before surgery, ask your surgeon:

Exactly what will be done during the operation?
What are the goals of the surgery?
Are there are other options?
Will the surgery change the way I look or the way my body works?
What side effects can I expect?

 
Quit smoking
If you smoke, quitting for good (before treatment starts, if you can ) is the best way to improve your chances for survival. Smoking during cancer treatment can increase the risk of side effects after surgery and is linked to poor wound healing and worse outcomes. Smoking after treatment can also increase the risk of the cancer coming back as well as the risk of getting a new cancer. It is never too late to quit.
Types of surgery for salivary gland cancer
The type of surgery will depend on which salivary gland is affected.
Parotid gland surgery
Most salivary gland tumors occur in the parotid gland. Surgery here is complicated by the fact that the facial nerve (which controls movement of the facial muscles, some ability to taste, the ability to make tears and saliva, and some aspects of sensation of the skin on the same side of the face) passes through the gland. For these operations, a cut is made in the skin in front of the ear and may extend down to the neck.
Most parotid gland cancers start in the outside part of the gland, called the superficial lobe. These can be treated by removing only this lobe, which is called a superficial parotidectomy. This usually leaves the facial nerve unharmed and does not affect facial movement, taste, or sensation.
If your cancer has spread deeper, the surgeon will remove the entire gland. This operation is called a total parotidectomy. If the cancer has grown into the facial nerve, it will have to be removed as well. If your surgeon has mentioned this surgery as a possibility, ask what can be done to repair the nerve and treat side effects caused when the nerve is removed. If the cancer has grown into other tissues near your parotid gland, these tissues might also need to be removed.
Submandibular or sublingual gland surgery
If your cancer is in the submandibular or sublingual glands, the surgeon will make a cut in the skin to remove the entire gland and perhaps some of the surrounding tissue or bone. Nerves that pass through or near these glands control movement of the tongue and the lower half of the face, as well as sensation and taste. Depending on the size and location of the cancer, the surgeon may need to remove some of these nerves.
Minor salivary gland surgery
Minor salivary gland cancers can occur in your lips, tongue, palate (roof of the mouth), mouth, throat, voice box (larynx), nose, and sinuses. The surgeon usually removes some surrounding tissue along with the cancer. The exact details of surgery depend on the size and location of the cancer.
Possible risks and side effects of salivary gland surgery
All surgery has some risks, including complications from anesthesia, bleeding, blood clots, and infections. These risks are generally low but are higher with more complicated operations.
Pain: For any salivary gland cancer surgery, the surgeon may need to cut through your skin or cut inside your mouth. Most people will have some pain afterward, but this can usually be controlled with medicines.
Damage to the facial nerve: If your facial nerve is damaged during surgery, you might lose control of your facial muscles on the side where the surgery was done. That side of your face may droop. You might also have trouble closing your eyes completely on that side which can lead to dry eyes. This might be treated with eye drops, eye patches, or artificial tears. If the injury to the facial nerve is related to retraction (pulling) of the nerve during surgery and/or swelling from the operation, the damage might heal over time and the facial nerve function usually returns over a few months. If the facial nerve does not start working after a certain period of time, there are some types of surgery that might help, such as nerve grafting. It is a good idea to ask about possible treatments for this side effect.  
Frey syndrome: Sometimes, nerves cut during surgery grow back abnormally and become connected to the sweat glands of the face. This condition, called Frey syndrome or gustatory sweating, results in flushing or sweating over areas of your face when you chew. Frey syndrome can be treated with medicines or with additional surgery.
Trouble speaking or swallowing: Damage to other nerves in the face or mouth might cause problems with tongue movement, speech, or swallowing.
Change in how you look: Depending on the extent of the surgery, your appearance may be changed as a result. This can range from a simple scar on the side of the face or neck to more extensive changes if nerves, parts of bones, or other structures need to be removed.
It’s important to talk with your doctor before the surgery about what changes in appearance or other side effects you might expect. This can help you prepare for them. Your doctor can also give you an idea about what corrective options might be available afterward, such as skin grafts, nerve grafts, and reconstructive surgery.
Lymph node removal (neck dissection)
Salivary gland cancers sometimes spread to lymph nodes in the neck (cervical lymph nodes), and these may need to be removed as a part of treating the cancer. Surgery to remove lymph nodes might be called a lymph node dissection, lymphadenectomy, or neck dissection. 
A neck dissection might be done if:

Lymph nodes in the neck are enlarged (which may be felt or seen on a CT or MRI scan)
A PET (positron emission tomography) scan suggests the lymph nodes may contain cancer
The cancer is high grade (looks very abnormal in the lab) or has other features that mean it has a high risk of spreading
A biopsy of one of the abnormal lymph nodes in the neck shows cancer 

The removed lymph nodes are looked at closely in the lab to see if they contain cancer cells. Taking out the lymph nodes can help ensure all of the cancer is removed. It can also be important for staging and deciding if more treatment is needed.
There are many types of neck dissections, and they differ in how much tissue is removed from the neck. The amount of tissue removed depends on the primary cancer’s size and how much it has spread to lymph nodes.

In a partial or selective neck dissection only a few lymph nodes are removed.
For a modified radical neck dissection, most lymph nodes on one side of the neck between the jawbone and collarbone are removed, as well as some muscle and nerve tissue.
In a radical neck dissection, nearly all nodes on one side, as well as even more muscles, nerves, and veins are removed.

This type of surgery is usually done through an incision (cut) across the side of the neck, but sometimes a longer incision going down the neck might be needed.
Possible risks and side effects of lymph node removal
The general risks of a neck dissection are much like those with any other type of surgery, including problems with anesthesia, bleeding, blood clots, infections, and poor wound healing. Most people will have some pain afterward , but this can usually be controlled with pain medicines.
Nerve damage: The most common side effects of any neck dissection are numbness of the ear, weakness when raising the arm above the head, and weakness of the lower lip. These side effects can happen when nerves that supply these areas are damaged during the operation. After a selective neck dissection, the nerve might only be injured and can heal over time. Nerves heal slowly and the weakness of the shoulder and lower lip may go away after a few months. If a nerve is removed as part of a radical neck dissection or because of involvement with tumor, the weakness will be permanent.
After any neck dissection procedure, physical therapy can help improve neck and shoulder movement.
Sentinel lymph node biopsy
Sentinel lymph node mapping and biopsy has become a common way to find out whether cancer has spread to the lymph nodes. It may be used in certain types of salivary gland cancer and can help keep you from needing a neck dissection. This procedure can find the lymph nodes that drain lymph fluid from the salivary gland where the cancer started. Since these lymph nodes are usually the first place cancer will go, they are taken out and checked for cancer during the surgery. If no cancer cells are found, the other lymph nodes can be left alone. If cancer cells are found in them, a more complex neck dissection is usually needed.  
Sentinel lymph node biopsy should only be done at treatment centers by doctors with a lot of experience in the technique.
Supportive surgery
Feeding tubes
Sometimes, if salivary gland cancer has spread widely to nearby tissues, these cancers may keep you from swallowing enough food to stay well nourished. This can make you weak and make it harder to complete treatment. Sometimes the treatment, such as extensive surgery, can make it hard to eat.
A gastrostomy tube (G-tube) is a feeding tube that's put through the skin and muscle of your abdomen (belly) and right into your stomach. Sometimes this tube is placed during an operation, but often it's put in endoscopically. While you are sedated (using drugs to put you in a deep sleep), the doctor puts a long, thin, flexible tube with a camera on the end (an endoscope) down the throat to see inside the stomach. The feeding tube is then guided through the endoscope and to the outside of the body. When the feeding tube is placed through endoscopy, it's called a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy, or PEG tube. Once in place, it can be used to put liquid nutrition right into the stomach. As long as they can still swallow normally, people with these tubes can eat normal food, too.
PEG tubes can be used for as long as needed. Sometimes these tubes are used for a short time to help keep you healthy and fed during treatment. They can be removed when you can eat normally.
If the swallowing problem is likely to be only short-term, another option is to place a nasogastric feeding tube (NG tube). This tube goes in through the nose, down the esophagus, and into the stomach. Again, special liquid nutrients are put in through the tube. Some people dislike having a tube coming out of their nose, and prefer a PEG tube.
In any case, the patient and family are taught how to use the tube. After you go home, home health nurses usually visit to make sure you are comfortable with tube feedings.Studies have shown that people with squamous cell cancers of the head and neck who are treated at centers that treat a lot of head and neck cancers with radiation, tend to live longer. Even though salivary gland cancers are rarely squamous cell cancers, they are not common and the operations tend to be complicated. Given this,  it’s important to go to a cancer center and radiation oncologist who have experience treating these cancers. 
Radiation therapy uses high-energy x-rays or particles to destroy cancer cells or slow their growth. It can be used in many ways to treat salivary gland cancer:
Radiation therapy may be used:

As the main treatment (alone or with chemotherapy) for some salivary gland cancers that can’t be removed by surgery because of the size or location of the tumor
As the main treatment (alone or with chemotherapy) or if a person can’t have (or doesn’t want) surgery
After surgery, also called adjuvant radiation, (alone or with chemotherapy) to try to kill any cancer cells that might have been left behind to help lower the chances of the cancer coming back
To help with symptoms, such as pain, bleeding, or trouble swallowing, in people with advanced salivary gland cancer

Chemoradiation (radiation given at the same time as chemotherapy) often works better than radiation alone, but it also has more side effects.
Radiation to this part of your body can cause problems for your teeth and gums, so it's important to see a dentist before starting treatment. A dentist can make sure your mouth is healthy before treatment. They might recommend that certain bad teeth be removed before you start radiation because they can increase your chance of infection. During and after treatment, your dentist can help check for and treat any problems that may come up, such as infection or tooth and bone damage.
Quit smoking before salivary gland treatment
If you smoke, it is important to quit. Smoking during radiation treatment can cause more side effects and a poor response to radiation, which can raise your risk of the cancer coming back (recurrence). Smoking after treatment also increases the chance of getting a new cancer. Quitting smoking for good (before treatment starts, if you can) is the best way to improve your chances for successful treatment. It is never too late to quit. For help, see How To Quit Using Tobacco.
External beam radiation for salivary gland cancers
External beam radiation therapy (EBRT), is the type of radiation therapy used most often to treat salivary gland cancer. It focuses radiation from outside the body onto the cancer.
Before starting EBRT, a somewhat flexible but sturdy mesh head and neck mask might be made to hold your head, neck, and shoulders in the exact same position for each treatment. Some people might feel a bit confined while this mask is on and might need to ask for medicine to help them relax during the treatment. Sometimes, the mask can be adjusted so that it is not too constricting. Discuss your options with your radiation oncologist. You might also be fitted for a bite block that you hold in your mouth during treatment.
Getting radiation treatment is much like getting an x-ray, but the radiation dose is stronger and aimed more precisely at the cancer. The procedure itself is painless and each treatment lasts only a few minutes. The setup time – getting you into place for treatment – often takes longer.
Types of external beam radiation therapy (EBRT)
There are more advanced EBRT techniques that help doctors focus and aim the radiation more precisely.
Three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy (3D-CRT) uses special computers to precisely map the location of the tumor. Several radiation beams are then shaped and aimed at the tumor from different directions, which makes it less likely to damage the normal tissues it passes through. The beams come together at the tumor to give a higher dose of radiation there.
Intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) is an advanced form of 3D-CRT. It uses a computer-driven machine that moves around the patient as it delivers radiation. Along with shaping the beams and aiming them at the tumor from several angles, the intensity (strength) of the beams can be adjusted to limit the dose reaching the most sensitive nearby normal tissues. This may let the doctor give a higher dose to the tumor.
Proton beam radiation therapy focuses beams of protons instead of x-rays on the cancer. Unlike x-rays, which go through the patient and expose tissues to radiation both before and after they hit the tumor, protons only travel a certain distance, so the tissues behind the tumor are exposed to very little radiation. Even the tissues in front of the tumor see less radiation than the tumor itself. This means that proton beam radiation can deliver radiation to the cancer while doing less damage to nearby normal tissues. Because there are so many critical structures close by, proton beam radiation can be used to treat certain salivary gland tumors. Proton therapy can be a safe option in certain cases when using x-rays is not.
Proton therapy is not widely available in the United States. Proton therapy might also not be covered by all insurance companies at this time.
Fast neutron beam radiation uses a beam of high-energy neutrons instead of using x-rays. Neutrons are neutral particles in atoms. Some studies have suggested that this type of radiation may be more effective, but it may also lead to more side effects. There is only one neutron therapy center in the United States at this time.
Treatment schedules for external beam radiation therapy (EBRT)
Standard EBRT for salivary gland cancers is usually given in daily fractions (doses) 5 days a week for about 6 to 7 weeks. But sometimes other schedules might be used:

Hyperfractionation radiation is a slightly lower radiation dose given more than once a day (for example, twice a day for 7 weeks). 
Accelerated fractionation radiation is the standard dose of radiation given each day but over a shorter time (5 to 6 weeks) instead of the usual 7 weeks (for example, radiation is given 6 days a week over 5 weeks instead of the standard 5 days a week for 7 weeks). 
Hypofractionation radiation is a slightly higher radiation dose given each day to lessen the number of treatments (for example, a higher radiation dose is given each day for 6 weeks, not the standard 7 weeks).

Possible side effects of radiation therapy for salivary gland cancer
If you are going to get radiation therapy, it’s important to ask your doctor about the possible side effects so you know what to expect.
Short-term side effects of radiation therapy
Radiation to the cheek, mouth, and throat area can cause several short-term side effects depending on where the radiation is aimed and can include:

Skin changes like a sunburn or suntan in the treated area
Loss of taste
Redness, soreness, or even pain in the mouth and throat
Dry mouth
Trouble swallowing
Feeling tired
Open sores in the mouth and throat
Hoarseness

Often these go away over time after treatment ends.
Long-lasting or permanent side effects of radiation therapy
Poor nutrition and trouble swallowing: Many people treated with radiation to the salivary gland area have painful sores in the mouth and throat that can make it very hard to eat and drink. This can lead to weight loss and poor nutrition. The sores heal with time after the radiation ends, but some people continue to have problems swallowing long after treatment ends because of the tightening of the muscles caused by radiation. Ask your speech pathologist about swallowing exercises you can do to help keep those muscles working and increase your chance of eating normally after treatment. Liquid feeding through a tube placed into the stomach might be needed. (See Surgery for Salivary Gland Cancer for more on tube feedings.)
Dry mouth: Damage to the salivary (spit) glands from radiation can cause a dry mouth that doesn't get better with time. For most major salivary gland cancers, radiation is only given to the side of the face and neck with the cancer. This reduces the risk of serious long-term side effects, but in rare instances, both sides of your face and neck might need to be treated with radiation. This may damage other salivary glands, resulting in permanently dry mouth. This can lead to discomfort and problems eating and swallowing, as well as damage to the jaw bone.
The lack of saliva can also lead to tooth decay (cavities). People treated with radiation to the mouth or neck need to practice careful oral hygiene to help prevent this problem and see their dentist regularly. Fluoride treatments may also help.
Damage to the jawbone: This problem, known as osteoradionecrosis of the jaw, can be a serious side effect of radiation treatment. This is more common after tooth infection, extraction, or trauma, and it can be hard to treat. The main symptom is pain in the jaw. In some cases, the bone actually breaks. Sometimes the fractured bone heals by itself, but often the damaged bone will have to be repaired with surgery.
To help prevent this problem, people getting radiation to the mouth or throat area need to see a dentist to have any problems with their teeth treated before radiation is started. In some cases, teeth may need to be removed.
Lockjaw: Lockjaw, also knows as trismus, is a condition in which the mouth cannot open fully. This can be a serious side effect of radiation treatment. It happens because of scarring or damage to the muscles, joints, and tissue that help the jaw work. This can make it hard for people to chew their food well, speak properly, and can increase the chance of cavities. Not everyone who gets radiation for salivary gland cancer will have this side effect, but spotting the problem early can help people start treatment sooner and lower the chances that it will cause major troubles.
Hearing loss: The nerves or organs that help you hear can be damaged by radiation. You might be asked to see an audiologist (a person who specializes in hearing) to test your hearing before and after treatment to watch for any signs of hearing loss.
Thyroid problems: Radiation might damage your thyroid gland. Your doctor will do blood tests regularly to see how well your thyroid is working. Some people might need to take pills to replace thyroid hormone at some point if the thyroid gland is not working well.
Lymphedema: Some people treated with radiation therapy might be at risk of developing lymphedema in the head and neck areas that were treated. These areas can become swollen and firm. This can be worse if the person also had surgery. Sometimes, medicines, physical therapy, or massage therapy might be helpful.
Damage to the carotid artery: Radiation to the neck area might increase a person’s risk of stroke many years after treatment. This might be because of health problems that were already present before radiation such as narrowing of the artery or an increase in plaques both of which can decrease blood flow. People who smoke are also damaging their arteries. Because of this some doctors might order regular ultrasounds for you after treatment, to keep an eye on the arteries.
It’s important to discuss the possible side effects of radiation therapy with your doctor before starting treatment, and to make sure everything is being done to try to limit these side effects as much as possible. If you do have side effects, there are ways to lessen many of them, so be sure to discuss any problems with your cancer care team.Quit smoking before salivary gland cancer treatment
If you smoke, you should quit. Smoking during chemotherapy treatment can cause more side effects and can cause the chemo drugs to not work as well. It can give you a higher chance of getting an infection and is linked to worse outcomes. Smoking after treatment can also increase the risk of the cancer coming back and of getting another new cancer. Quitting smoking (before treatment starts, if you can) is the best way to improve your chances of survival. It is never too late to quit. For help, see How To Quit Using Tobacco. 
How is chemotherapy used to treat salivary gland cancers?
Chemotherapy (chemo) is treatment with anti-cancer drugs that are given into a vein or by mouth. These drugs enter the bloodstream and reach almost all areas of the body. Chemo is not often used to treat salivary gland cancers because, in general, it does not work well in these cancers .
For people with salivary gland cancers, chemo is most often used:

When the cancer has spread (metastasized) to distant organs
If the cancer could not be controlled by surgery and radiation therapy

Chemo sometimes shrinks the tumors, but it’s not likely to cure this type of cancer.
Chemoradiation is chemotherapy given at the same time as radiation. It is used to treat salivary gland cancer cells that are too small to be seen by the naked eye and have features that put them at high risk for coming back after surgery or salivary gland cancers that cannot be removed by surgery. There are not many studies to support chemoradiation in these instances for salivary gland cancer, so it is not routinely done. Clinical trials are being done to look more at using chemoradiation to treat unresectable (cannot be removed by surgery) salivary gland cancers . 
How is chemotherapy given?
Chemo drugs for salivary gland cancer are usually given by mouth or into a vein (IV) as an infusion over a certain period of time. This can be done in a doctor’s office, infusion center, or in a hospital setting.
Often, a slightly larger and stronger IV is required in the vein system for chemo. These IVs are known as central venous catheters (CVCs), central venous access devices (CVADs), or central lines. They are used to put medicines, blood products, nutrients, or fluids right into your blood. They can also be used to take blood for tests. There are different kinds of CVCs. The most common types are the port and the PICC line.
Chemotherapy is given in cycles: the drug or a combination of drugs is given on a set schedule, followed by a rest period. Common schedules of chemo cycles can be once a week, once every 3 weeks, or once every 4 weeks. The schedule depends on the drugs used. The chemo schedule repeats to start the next cycle.
Chemo drugs used to treat salivary gland cancer
Some of the chemo drugs used to treat salivary gland cancers include:

Cisplatin
Mitoxantrone
Doxorubicin (Adriamycin)
Epirubicin (Ellence)
Cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan)
Paclitaxel (Taxol)
Docetaxel (Taxotere)
Vinorelbine (Navelbine)
Methotrexate

These drugs may be used alone, but are more often given in combinations of 2 or more drugs. Because salivary gland cancers are not common and because there are different types of salivary gland cancers, no large studies have been done to prove one chemo plan is better than the others. The best way to use chemotherapy to treat salivary gland cancer is not clear. New chemo drugs and combinations of drugs are being studied in clinical trials.
Possible side effects of chemotherapy
Chemo drugs attack cells that are dividing quickly, which is why they work against cancer cells. But other cells in the body, like those in the bone marrow (where new blood cells are made), the lining of the mouth and intestines, and the hair follicles, also divide quickly. These cells are also likely to be affected by chemo, which can lead to side effects.
The side effects of chemo depend on the type and dose of drugs given and the length of time they are used. Common side effects include:

Hair loss
Mouth sores
Loss of appetite
Nausea and vomiting
Diarrhea or constipation

Chemo can affect the blood-producing cells of the bone marrow, which can lead to:

Increased chance of infections (from having too few white blood cells)
Easy bruising or bleeding (from having too few blood platelets)
Fatigue (from having too few red blood cells)

Along with the risks above, some side effects are seen more often with certain chemo drugs.  For example:

Cisplatin and paclitaxel can cause nerve damage (neuropathy). This can sometimes lead to hearing loss or problems in the hands and feet such as pain, burning or tingling sensations, sensitivity to cold or heat, or weakness. In most cases, this gets better or goes away once treatment stops, but it can last a long time in some people.
Cisplatin can also hurt the kidneys. To help prevent kidney damage, intravenous (IV) fluid is given before and after each dose. 

You should report any problems you have while getting chemo to your medical team, so that they can be treated right away.
There are often ways to lessen these side effects, and they usually go away over time after treatment ends. Be sure to ask your doctor or nurse what can be done to help reduce side effects, and let them know when you do have side effects so they can be managed . For example, drugs can be given to help prevent or reduce nausea and vomiting. In some cases, the doses of the chemo drugs may need to be lowered or treatment may need to be delayed or stopped to keep the effects from getting worse.Targeted drug therapy uses medicines that target or are directed at proteins on cancer cells that help them grow, spread, and live longer. Recent research has shown that some salivary gland cancers make certain proteins or have gene changes that can be targeted with specific drugs to destroy cancer cells or slow their growth. Many of these drugs can be taken as pills and their side effects are different from those of chemotherapy (sometimes less severe).
Some targeted drugs, for example, monoclonal antibodies, work in more than one way to control cancer cells and may also be considered immunotherapy because they boost the immune system.
Drugs that target the androgen receptor
Hormone therapy is a common treatment for prostate cancers and breast cancers and it has been found to be helpful in certain salivary gland cancers, too.
Some salivary gland cancers make a protein called an androgen receptor  that helps cancer cells grow with hormones. Bicalutamide (Casodex) is a hormone drug (given as a pill) that attaches to this receptor (protein) to keep the cancer from growing. It is typically given with leuprolide (Lupron, Eligard), another type of hormone therapy, that lowers the hormone levels in the blood so there are not many hormones left to attach to the androgen receptor. This also makes it hard for the cancer to grow. Leuprolide is injected or placed as small implants under the skin. To use this combined treatment, salivary gland cancers must be tested first in the lab for the androgen receptor. This hormone treatment is often given after chemotherapy has been tried.
Side effects of bicalutamide and leuprolide given together can include diarrhea, feeling sick to your stomach, liver problems, and tiredness.
Drugs that target HER2
Some salivary gland cancers make too much of a growth-promoting protein called HER2. Cancers with high levels of HER2 are called HER2-positive. Drugs that target the HER2 protein can often be helpful in treating these cancers, specifically mucoepidermoid and salivary ductal carcinomas.
Trastuzumab (Herceptin) is a monoclonal antibody, a man-made version of an immune system protein, which targets the HER2 protein. This drug only works if the cancer cells have too much HER2 protein, so they must be tested for HER2 before starting treatment. Trastuzumab is infused into a vein and is usually given along with paclitaxel or docetaxel (chemotherapy drugs).
If trastuzumab and a taxane chemotherapy combination has been tried and is no longer working, sometimes an antibody-drug conjugate (ADC) might be used. An ADC is a monoclonal antibody linked to a chemotherapy drug. In this case, the anti-HER2 antibody acts like a homing signal by attaching to the HER2 protein on cancer cells, bringing the chemo directly to them. Ado-trastuzumab emtansine (Kadcyla or TDM-1), an ADC, has had favorable initial results in salivary gland cancers that are HER2 positive. This drug is given in a vein (IV).
Serious side effects of HER2 targeted drug therapy can include heart damage or heart failure.
TRK inhibitors
Some salivary gland cancers have changes in one of the NTRK genes. This gene change causes them to make abnormal TRK proteins, which can lead to abnormal cell growth and cancer. This gene change is more often seen in secretory salivary gland cancers.
Larotrectinib (Vitrakvi) and entrectinib (Rozlytrek) are drugs that target the TRK proteins. These drugs can be used first to treat advanced salivary gland cancers with NTRK gene changes.
These drugs are taken as pills, once or twice a day.
Common side effects of TRK inhibitors include muscle and joint pain, cough, dizziness, fatigue, nausea, vomiting, constipation, fever, abdominal pain, and diarrhea.Immunotherapy uses medicines to boost a person’s own immune system to recognize and destroy cancer cells more effectively. Immunotherapy typically works on specific proteins involved in the immune system to enhance the immune response. These drugs have side effects different from those of chemotherapy.
Some immunotherapy drugs, for example, monoclonal antibodies, work in more than one way to control cancer cells and may also be considered targeted drug therapy because they block a specific protein on the cancer cell to keep it from growing.
Immunotherapy is used to treat some types of salivary gland cancer.
Immune checkpoint inhibitors for salivary gland cancer
An important part of the immune system is its ability to keep itself from attacking normal cells in the body. To do this, it uses proteins (or "checkpoints") on immune cells that need to be turned on (or off) to start an immune response. Salivary gland cancer cells sometimes use these checkpoints to avoid being attacked by the immune system. Drugs that target these checkpoint proteins, (called immune checkpoint inhibitors) can be used to treat some salivary gland cancers.
PD-1 inhibitor
Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) for salivary gland cancer  
Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) is a drug that targets PD-1 (a protein on immune system T cells that normally helps keep them from attacking other cells in the body). By blocking PD-1, these drugs boost the immune response against cancer cells. This can often shrink tumors or slow their growth.
Pembrolizumab might be an option to treat some advanced salivary gland cancers, typically after other treatments have been tried or when no other good treatment options are available, and if the cancer cells have a high tumor mutational burden (TMB-H), meaning the cancer cells have many gene mutations. The tumor cells can be tested for these gene changes.
This drug is an intravenous (IV) infusion, and is typically given every 3 or 6 weeks.
Possible side effects of immune checkpoint inhibitors
Side effects of these drugs can include fatigue, cough, nausea, skin rash, poor appetite, constipation, and diarrhea.
Other, more serious side effects occur less often.
Infusion reactions: Some people might have an infusion reaction while getting these drugs. This is like an allergic reaction, and can include fever, chills, flushing of the face, rash, itchy skin, feeling dizzy, wheezing, and trouble breathing. It’s important to tell your doctor or nurse right away if you have any of these symptoms while getting these drugs.
Autoimmune reactions: These drugs remove one of the protections on the body's immune system. Sometimes the immune system starts attacking other parts of the body, which can cause serious or even life-threatening problems in the lungs, intestines, liver, hormone-making glands, kidneys, or other organs.
It’s very important to report any new side effects to your health care team quickly. If serious side effects do occur, treatment may need to be stopped and you may get high doses of corticosteroids to suppress your immune system.The treatment options for salivary gland cancer depend largely on the type and stage (extent) of the cancer. But other factors, such as the grade of the cancer (how likely it is to grow and spread); and a person’s overall health, can also be important.
Since salivary gland cancers are rare and can be hard to treat, clinical trials might be a good option to think about. 
Stage I
These cancers are small and still just in the salivary gland. If you have stage I salivary gland cancer, your doctors will probably recommend surgery to remove the cancer and part or all of the salivary gland.
Radiation therapy might be advised after surgery if you have an intermediate- or high-grade cancer or an adenoid cystic carcinoma, if the cancer could not be removed completely, if the edges of the removed area have cancer cells (a sign that some cancer might have been left behind), or if the cancer is invading (growing into) nearby nerves.
Stage II
Stage II salivary gland cancers are larger but are still just in the salivary gland. They are also treated mainly with surgery, but it may be more extensive (covering a wider area) than for stage I cancers. The surgeon may also remove lymph nodes in your neck on the same side to see if they contain cancer, especially if the main tumor is high-grade.
Radiation therapy  may be given after surgery if your cancer is intermediate- or high-grade or an adenoid cystic carcinoma, if the cancer could not be removed completely, if the cancer is invading nearby blood vessels, lymph vessels, or nerves; if the removed lymph nodes have cancer; or if the edges of the removed tissue contain cancer cells. Chemotherapy might be given along with radiation in certain cases, but this combination treatment is still being studied. 
Radiation therapy might be an option as the main treatment if surgery would result in serious problems with eating, speech, or appearance, or for people who refuse surgery. But it’s not clear if this offers the same chance to cure the cancer as surgery, so not all doctors agree that this is a good approach for stage II cancers.
Stage III and IVA
These cancers are even larger and/or have started to grow outside the salivary gland into nearby structures. They might have also spread to lymph nodes in the neck on the same side as the cancer or both sides of the neck.
Doctors generally recommend extensive surgery (removing the salivary gland containing the tumor, nearby tissues, and lymph nodes in your neck on the same side) if it’s possible. For low-grade tumors with no concerning features, this might be the only treatment needed if all of the cancer is removed. But in other cases, especially for high-grade tumors or adenoid cystic cancer, surgery is often followed by radiation therapy. Chemotherapy (chemo) may be added as well, but it’s not clear how helpful this is. This is still being studied.
Radiation therapy (with or without chemo) may be used as the main treatment if surgery is not a good option (for example, if surgical removal of the cancer would cause serious problems with eating, speech, or appearance, or if someone is not healthy enough to have surgery).
Stage IVB
Stage IVB salivary gland cancers are very hard to cure, particularly if the cancer has spread to distant organs.
Some of these cancers might be treated with surgery if the doctor feels all of the cancer can be removed. (This would be followed by radiation therapy and maybe chemo.)
But most often, radiation therapy is used as the main treatment to try to shrink the tumor(s) and relieve pain, bleeding, or other symptoms. Radiation might be combined with chemo. If the cancer has spread to other parts of the body, chemo or targeted drug therapy might shrink or slow the growth of the cancer for a time and may help relieve symptoms caused by the cancer.
Because these cancers are rare and can be hard to treat, taking part in a clinical trial is a good option.

Treatment of recurrent salivary gland cancer
Cancer is called recurrent if it comes back after treatment. Cancer can come back locally (in or near the same place it started) or distantly (spread to organs such as the lungs or liver).
If cancer returns after treatment, your choices depend on the location and the extent of the cancer as well as what treatment was used the first time. It’s important to understand the risks and benefits and goals of further treatment – whether it’s to try to cure the cancer or to help relieve symptoms.
If the cancer recurs locally and is thought to be resectable (able to be removed completely), surgery is usually the treatment of choice. This is often followed by radiation therapy if it wasn’t given before.
If the cancer returns in the area where it started (local) but is not resectable, radiation therapy may be an option. Chemotherapy (chemo) might be used along with the radiation or by itself (especially if radiation therapy was already used the first time).
Salivary gland cancers that come back in distant parts of the body are usually treated with chemo or targeted drug therapy. In some cases, other treatments such as surgery or radiation might be used to help relieve symptoms from the spread of the cancer or to treat a small number of tumors that might be growing in certain organs like the lungs. If the cancer is growing very slowly, it may be watched and treated only if it starts to cause problems.For some people with salivary gland cancer, treatment will remove or destroy the cancer. The end of treatment can be both stressful and exciting. You may be relieved to finish treatment, but find it hard not to worry about cancer coming back. These feelings are very common if you’ve had cancer.
For other people, the cancer might never go away completely. Some people may get regular treatment with chemotherapy or targeted therapy or other treatments to try and help keep the cancer under control. Learning to live with cancer that does not go away can be difficult and very stressful. 
Ask your doctor for a survivorship care plan
Talk with your doctor about developing a survivorship care plan for you. This plan might include: 

A suggested schedule for follow-up exams and tests
A schedule for other tests you might need in the future, such as early detection (screening) tests  for other types of cancer
A list of possible late- or long-term side effects from your treatment, including what to watch for and when you should contact your doctor
Suggestions for things you can do that might improve your health, including possibly lowering your chances of the cancer coming back, such as diet and physical activity suggestions
Reminders to keep your appointments with your primary care provider (PCP), who will monitor your general health care. 

Follow-up care
People with cancer of the salivary gland are at risk of the cancer coming back and are at risk for developing new cancers in the head and neck area, so they must be watched closely after treatment. Your cancer care team will discuss which tests should be done and how often based on the type and stage of the cancer, the type of treatment you had, and the chance of the cancer coming back.
After you have completed treatment, you will likely have follow-up visits with your doctor for many years. It’s very important to go to all of your follow-up appointments. During these visits, your doctors will ask if you are having any problems and may do exams, lab tests, or imaging tests to look for signs of cancer returning, a new cancer, or treatment side effects. 
Almost any cancer treatment can have side effects. Some may last for a few weeks to several months, but others can last the rest of your life. Some treatment side effects might last a long time or might not even show up until years after you have finished treatment. Your doctor visits are a good time to ask questions and talk about any changes or problems you notice or concerns you have.
Report any new symptoms to the doctor right away. This might help your doctor find recurrent cancer as early as possible, when the cancer is small and easier to treat.
Doctor visits and tests
If there are no signs of cancer remaining, many doctors will recommend you have a physical exam and some of the tests listed below every few months for the first couple of years after treatment, then every 4 to 6 months or so for the next few years. People who were treated for early-stage cancers may do this less often.
Endoscopy: In some people, endoscopy might be done as a follow-up test. A common schedule is about:

Every 1 to 3 months during the first year after treatment
Every 2 to 6 months during the second year after treatment
Every 4 to 8 months during the 3rd to 5th years after treatment
Every year after the 5th year of treatment

Quitting smoking: If you had trouble quitting smoking before treatment, your doctor may recommend counseling as well as medication to help you. It is very important to quit smoking because even people with early-stage salivary gland cancer are at risk of developing a new smoking-related cancer if they continue to smoke. See Stay Away from Tobacco and call 1-800-227-2345 for more information about quitting smoking.
Blood tests: If you were treated with radiation to the neck, it might have affected your thyroid gland. You will most likely need regular blood tests to check your thyroid function.
Imaging: Chest x-rays and other imaging tests might be used to watch for a recurrence or a new tumor, especially if you have new symptoms.
Dental exams: People treated with surgery and/or radiation might also have problems with dry mouth and tooth decay, so regular dental exams are often recommended. Artificial (fake) saliva might be recommended for dry mouth.
Help for problems with eating and nutrition: Cancers of the salivary glands and their treatments can sometimes cause problems such as loss or change in taste, dry mouth, or even loss of teeth. This can make it hard to eat, which can lead to weight loss and weakness due to poor nutrition.
Some people might need to adjust what they eat during and after treatment or might need nutritional supplements to help make sure they get the nutrition they need. Some may even need a feeding tube placed into the stomach, at least for a short time during and after treatment.
A team of doctors and nutritionists can work with you to help manage your individual nutritional needs. This can help you maintain your weight and get the nutrients you need. They can also show you swallowing exercises that can help keep these muscles working and give you a better chance of eating normally after treatment. If a dry mouth is making it hard to eat, your doctor may recommend a saliva substitute or give you some medications to help relieve the symptoms.
Speech, hearing, and swallowing rehabilitation: Radiation, surgery, and certain chemo drugs can lead to problems with speech, swallowing, and hearing. These are often checked and treated by a speech therapist (a professional who is trained in helping people with speech problems) after treatment. These experts are knowledgeable about speech and swallowing problems. They can help you learn to manage these problems. Some people might need to learn new ways of speaking. The speech therapist can play a major role in helping with this.
You might also need to see an audiologist (a specialist in hearing) for devices to improve your hearing if the treatment affected it.
Side effects from surgery: Surgery around the jaw or neck can sometimes lead to ear numbness, weakness in raising your arm above your head, and weakness of the lower lip. If this happens, your doctor can refer you to a physical therapist, who can teach you exercises to improve your neck and shoulder strength and movement.
Reconstructive surgery: Surgery or other treatments can affect nerves and other structures in the face and neck. This can affect how you look. Ask your doctor about reconstructive surgery options that might be available for you.

Keeping health insurance and copies of your medical records
Even after treatment, it’s very important to keep your health insurance. Tests and doctor visits cost a lot, and even though no one wants to think of their cancer coming back, this could happen.
At some point after your cancer treatment, you might find yourself seeing a new doctor who doesn’t know about your medical history. It’s important to keep copies of your medical records to give your new doctor the details of your diagnosis and treatment.
Can I lower my risk of the salivary gland cancer progressing or coming back?
If you have (or have had) salivary gland cancer, you probably want to know if there are things you can do that might lower your risk of the cancer growing or coming back, such as exercising, eating a certain type of diet, or taking nutritional supplements. Unfortunately, it’s not yet clear if there are things you can do that will help.
Quit smoking: Smoking during cancer treatment is known to reduce the benefit of treatment which can raise your risk of the cancer coming back (recurrence). Smoking also increases the risk of getting a new smoking-related cancer (see Second Cancers below). Survivors of salivary gland cancer who continue to smoke are also more likely to die from their cancer. Quitting smoking for good is the best way to improve your survival. It is never too late to quit.
Adopting healthy behaviors such as  eating well, getting regular physical activity, and staying at a healthy weight might help, but no one knows for sure. However, we do know that these types of changes can have positive effects on your health that can extend beyond your risk of salivary gland cancer or other cancers.
About dietary supplements
So far, no dietary supplements (including vitamins, minerals, and herbal products) have been shown to clearly help lower the risk of cancer progressing or coming back. This doesn’t mean that no supplements will help, but it’s important to know that none have been proven to do so.
Dietary supplements are not regulated like medicines in the United States – they do not have to be proven effective (or even safe) before being sold, although there are limits on what they’re allowed to claim they can do. If you’re thinking about taking any type of nutritional supplement, talk to your health care team. They can help you decide which ones you can use safely while avoiding those that might be harmful.
If the cancer comes back
If the cancer does recur (come back) , your treatment options will depend on where the cancer is located, what treatments you’ve had before, and your health. For more information on how recurrent cancer is treated, see Treatment Options by Stage of Salivary Gland Cancer.
For more you may also want to see Understanding Recurrence.
Getting emotional support
Some amount of feeling depressed, anxious, or worried is normal when cancer is a part of your life. Some people are affected more than others. But everyone can benefit from help and support from other people, whether friends and family, religious groups, support groups, professional counselors, or others. Learn more in Life After Cancer.
Second cancers after salivary gland cancer treatment
Cancer survivors can be affected by a number of health problems, but often their greatest concern is facing cancer again. If a cancer comes back after treatment it is called a recurrence. But some cancer survivors may develop a new, unrelated cancer later. This is called a second cancer.
People who’ve had salivary gland cancer can get a second cancer. And unfortunately, being treated for salivary gland cancer doesn’t mean you can’t get another cancer. People who have had salivary gland cancer can still get the same types of cancers that other people get. In fact, certain types of cancer and cancer treatments can be linked to a higher risk of specific second cancers.
Survivors of salivary gland cancers can get any second cancer, but they have an increased risk of:

Another salivary gland cancer (this is different from the first cancer coming back)
Cancer of the oral cavity (mouth)
Lung cancer
Thyroid cancer

Cancers of the lung and oral cavity are also linked to smoking.
What you can do to lower the risk of a second cancer
Quit smoking
Lung and oral cavity cancers are linked to tobacco use. While it's not easy to do, quitting tobacco can decrease your risk of many health problems, including another cancer. People who quit smoking have a lower risk of lung, esophagus, larynx, hypopharynx, and oral cavity and oropharynx cancers than those who continue to smoke. See Stay Away from Tobacco  to learn more about quitting tobacco.
Follow-up after treatment
After completing treatment for salivary gland cancer, you should still see your doctor regularly. Your doctor may order tests to look for signs that the cancer has come back or spread. These tests are also useful in finding some second cancers, particularly a new salivary gland cancer or lung cancer. Experts don’t recommend any other tests to look for second cancers in patients who don’t have symptoms. Let your doctor know about any new symptoms or problems, because they could be caused by the cancer coming back or by a new disease or second cancer.
Survivors of salivary gland cancers should follow the American Cancer Society guidelines for the early detection of cancer and stay away from tobacco products. Smoking increases the risk of getting certain second cancers as well as other health problems.
To help maintain good health, survivors should also:

Get to and stay at a healthy weight
Keep physically active and limit the time you spend sitting or lying down
Follow a healthy eating pattern that includes plenty of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains, and limits or avoids red and processed meats, sugary drinks, and highly processed foods
Not drink alcohol. If you do drink, have no more than 1 drink per day for women or 2 per day for men

These steps may also lower the risk of some other health problems.
See Second Cancers for more information.What is salivary gland cancer?
Salivary gland cancer can start in any of the salivary glands. It can have many names depending on which type of cell the cancer starts in. All of these cancers start when cells in part of a salivary gland grow out of control and crowd out normal cells. Ask your doctor to write down the exact kind of cancer you have because it can be confusing. 
Cancer cells can spread to other parts of the body. Cancer cells in a salivary gland can sometimes travel to the lung and grow there. When cancer cells do this, it’s called metastasis.To doctors, the cancer cells in the new place look just like the ones from the salivary gland where it started.
Cancer is always named for the place where it starts. So when salivary gland cancer spreads to the lung (or any other place), it’s still called salivary gland cancer. It’s not called lung cancer unless it starts from cells in the lung.
Ask your doctor to use this picture to show you where the cancer is.