To examine a tumor that might have grown into the deeper layers of the skin, the doctor may use an excisional biopsy, which might also be referred to as a local excision.
For this type of biopsy, the doctor first injects a medicine to numb the area. Then a surgical knife (scalpel) is used to cut through the full thickness of skin. A wedge or sliver of skin that includes the entire tumor is then removed, and the edges of the wound are typically stitched together.
This is usually the preferred method of biopsy if a more dangerous type of skin cancer is suspected, such as a melanoma or a Merkel cell carcinoma, although it isn’t always possible to do this type of biopsy.For a punch biopsy, the doctor first injects a medicine to numb the area. Then a tool that looks like a tiny round cookie cutter is used to remove a deep sample of skin. The doctor rotates the punch biopsy tool on the skin until it cuts through all the layers of the skin. The sample is then removed, and the edges of the biopsy site are often stitched together.For a shave biopsy procedure, the doctor first injects a medicine to numb the area. Then the top layers of the skin are shaved off with a small surgical blade.
Bleeding from the biopsy site is then stopped by applying an ointment, a chemical that stops bleeding, or a small electrical current to cauterize the wound.Mohs surgery (also known as Mohs micrographic surgery, or MMS) is sometimes used when there is a high risk the skin cancer will come back after treatment, when the extent of the skin cancer is not known, or when the goal is to save as much healthy skin as possible, such as with cancers near the eye or other critical areas such as the central part of the face, the ears, or fingers.
The Mohs procedure is done by a surgeon with special training. First, the surgeon injects a medicine to numb the area. The surgeon then removes a very thin layer of the skin (including the tumor) and checks the removed sample under a microscope. If cancer cells are seen, another layer is removed and examined. This is repeated until the skin samples are free of cancer cells.
This is a slow process, often taking several hours, but it means that more normal skin near the tumor can be saved. This can help the area look better after surgery.