Cancer starts when cells in the body begin to grow out of control. Uterine sarcoma is a cancer that starts in the muscle and supporting tissues of the uterus (womb). Compared to other types of uterine cancers, uterine sarcomas are rare.
To learn more about how cancers start and spread, see What Is Cancer?Uterine sarcomas are rare and make up about 2% to 5% of all uterine cancers. The most common types of uterine sarcomas are leiomyosarcoma and endometrial stromal sarcoma (ESS).
Most uterine sarcomas happen in people over the age of 40 and the average age at diagnosis is about 60 years old. 
Black women tend to have uterine leiomyosarcomas twice as often as White women, but not other types of uterine sarcomas.
Visit the American Cancer Society’s Cancer Statistics Center for more key statistics.Since uterine sarcomas are very rare, there's not been a lot of research done on them. Most experts agree that if available, treatment in a clinical trial should be considered for any type of uterine sarcoma. New ways to prevent and treat uterine sarcoma now are being researched.  Some of the promising new developments include the following.
Gene changes﻿
Recent research has improved our understanding of how changes in certain genes can cause normal cells to become cancer. We know that if mutations (changes) in important genes that control cell growth are damaged, uncontrolled growth may lead to cancer.
Research on uterine sarcomas has found many changes in the genes that control cell growth. For example, changes in the RB1, TP53, and PTEN genes have been found in uterine leiomyosarcomas.  Doctors are looking at how these gene changes might be useful in discovering new imaging tests or new targeted drug therapies to help diagnose and treat uterine sarcomas. They are also studying how these changes might help improve the doctor’s ability to diagnose the specific type of uterine sarcoma, as well as predict a person’s outcome (prognosis).
Imaging tests﻿
Imaging tests to more accurately diagnose uterine sarcomas is an active area of research. Treatment options for uterine tumors greatly depend on whether it is cancer or not, such as a leiomyoma (fibroid). Knowing this will help decide if surgery is needed, and, if so, would a cancer specialist be needed to remove the tumor. Efforts to improve imaging tests for these rare tumors have also led researchers to look at how these tests might be used to learn more about the tumor, such as whether chemo will be needed after surgery and the possible outcomes.
PET scans using different tracers are being studied, so are contrast-enhanced MRIs. And researchers are trying to find other factors that, used along with imaging tests, may help point to a uterine sarcoma, such as certain blood tests, tumor size, and the person's body weight.
Chemotherapy
New combinations of chemotherapy drugs, new drugs, and better ways to give chemo also are active areas of research. Surgery is the standard treatment for uterine sarcoma, but chemo with or without radiation treatments after surgery may help keep cancer from coming back. Studies are also being done to find out if giving certain chemo drugs after surgery can help some women with uterine sarcoma live longer.  
Hormone therapy
Hormone therapy may help treat and control some uterine sarcomas that have estrogen receptors and/or progesterone receptors. Researchers are trying to find out if drugs that control estrogen might help delay or even prevent these cancers from coming back after surgery. They are also looking at whether the ovaries need to be removed as part of treatment in all women with uterine sarcoma, or if it's safe to leave them, especially in young women with leiomyosarcoma or stage I cancers. 
Targeted drug therapy and immunotherapy
Doctors are also studying targeted drug therapies and immunotherapies as treatments for uterine sarcoma. These drugs don't work the same as chemotherapy drugs and may be used when chemo doesn't work or when uterine sarcoma comes back after treatment. Your doctor might test your cancer or blood for certain gene and protein changes that could help predict if your cancer could be treated with one of these targeted drugs or immunotherapy drugs.A risk factor is anything that increases your chance of getting a disease such as cancer. Different cancers have different risk factors. Some risk factors, like smoking, can be changed; others, like a person’s age or family history, can’t.
Having a risk factor, or even several, does not mean that you will get the disease. And many people who get the disease may have few or no known risk factors.
Although this cancer is very rare, a few risk factors are known to increase a woman's risk of developing a uterine sarcoma.
Pelvic radiation therapy
Radiation to the pelvis can increase your risk for developing uterine sarcoma. This has been seen sometimes after someone has had radiation to treat cervical cancer or rectal cancer. These cancers usually are diagnosed 5 to 25 years after the radiation treatment.
Congenital (heritable) retinoblastoma
Women who have had a type of eye cancer called congenital (heritable) retinoblastoma as a child have an increased risk of soft tissue sarcomas, including uterine sarcomas.
Family history of kidney cancer 
A rare family cancer syndrome called hereditary leiomyomatosis and renal cell cancer (HLRCC) has been linked to an increased risk of uterine sarcomas. 
Tamoxifen
 Although the risk is small, women taking tamoxifen to prevent or treat breast cancer have an increased risk of developing uterine sarcoma. These sarcomas often show up 2 to 5 years after starting tamoxifen. If you are taking tamoxifen, doctors recommend getting regular pelvic exams and more testing if you are having abnormal bleeding from the uterus.Doctors don't know exactly what causes most uterine sarcomas, but certain risk factors have been identified. Research is helping to learn more about this rare disease.
Scientists continue to learn about changes in the DNA of certain genes that help when normal uterine cells develop into sarcomas.
For example,

Changes in the RB1, TP53, and PTEN genes have been found in uterine leiomyosarcomas.
Low‐grade endometrial stromal sarcoma (ESS) is often linked with an abnormal gene called JAZF 1‐SUZ12. 
High‐grade endometrial stromal sarcoma (ESS) has been linked with the abnormal gene YWHAE‐NUTM.

You can learn more about research being done in What's New in Uterine Sarcoma Research and Treatment?Most cases of uterine sarcoma cannot be prevented.
Pelvic radiation
Although pelvic radiation increases the risk of developing a uterine sarcoma, the benefit of pelvic radiation in treating other cancers far outweighs the risk of developing a rare cancer such as uterine sarcoma many years later.
Tamoxifen
The risk of developing uterine sarcomas while taking tamoxifen is small and there are not specific things you can do to prevent a uterine sarcoma if you're taking it. But doctors will most likely watch you closely with regular pelvic exams and ask you to get medical care as soon as possible if you start to bleed abnormally from the uterus.Sometimes, knowing the signs and symptoms of uterine sarcoma and seeing a health care professional right away can help find it at an early stage (when it's small and hasn't spread). But many uterine sarcomas reach an advanced stage before signs and symptoms appear.
Screening tests
Screening refers to testing to find a disease, such as cancer, in people who don't have symptoms of the disease. At this time, there are no screening tests or exams to find uterine sarcomas in women without symptoms. Screening tests used for cervical cancer, such as a Pap test or HPV (human papillomavirus) test aren’t effective for uterine sarcomas.
Still, the Pap test is very good at finding early cancers of the cervix (the lower part of the uterus). For information on finding cervical cancer early, see Cervical Cancer Screening Guidelines.Certain symptoms might suggest you have a uterine sarcoma. But these symptoms don't always mean that a woman has uterine sarcoma. More often they are caused by something else, such as non-cancerous changes in the uterus (like fibroids), pre-cancer overgrowth of the endometrium, or endometrial carcinoma. Still, if you're having these problems, see a doctor as soon as possible to find the cause and get any needed treatment.
Abnormal bleeding or spotting
Most people diagnosed with uterine sarcomas have abnormal bleeding (bleeding between periods, more bleeding during periods, or bleeding after menopause). This symptom is more often caused by conditions other than cancer, but it's important to have any abnormal bleeding checked right away.
If you've gone through menopause, any vaginal bleeding or spotting is abnormal, and should be reported to your health care professional right away.
Vaginal discharge
Some women with uterine sarcomas have a vaginal discharge that does not have any blood. A discharge is most often a sign of infection or another non-cancer condition, but it also can be a sign of cancer. Any abnormal discharge should be checked by a health care provider.
Pain and/or a mass
Some women with uterine sarcomas might have pain in the pelvis or the abdomen and/or a mass (lump) that can be felt. You or your doctor may be able to feel the mass in your uterus, or you might have a feeling of fullness in your belly and/or pelvis.
Urine or bowel problems
A mass in the pelvis might push on the bladder which can cause you to urinate (pee) more often than usual. It might also disturb the bowels and cause constipation.If you have symptoms of uterine sarcoma, the first step is to see your doctor.
Medical history and physical exam
Your doctor will ask you about your personal and family medical history. You also will be asked about any symptoms, risk factors, and other health problems. A general physical and a pelvic exam will be done to check if the uterus is larger than normal.
If your doctor suspects cancer based on your symptoms and/or exam, you may be told you need other tests and also be referred to a gynecologist or a doctor specializing in cancers of the female reproductive system (called a gynecologic oncologist).
Tests to diagnose uterine sarcoma
Endometrial biopsy and tissue sampling
To find the reason for the abnormal bleeding, a small piece of tissue will be taken from the lining of the uterus (endometrium) and looked at closely in the lab. The tissue can also be removed by dilation and curettage (D&C). See below for a description of how this is done.
These procedures let the doctor see if the bleeding is caused by an overgrowth of cells in the endometrium (hyperplasia) that's not cancer, endometrial carcinoma, uterine sarcoma, or some other problem. The tests will find endometrial stromal sarcomas, but not as many leiomyosarcomas (LMSs).
These tests don't find LMSs as often because these cancers start in the muscle layer of the wall of the uterus, not the inner lining. To be found by an endometrial biopsy or D&C, LMSs need to have spread from the middle (muscle) layer to the inner lining of the uterus. In most cases, the only way to diagnose a LMS is by removing it with surgery. Many uterine sarcomas are diagnosed during or after surgery for what's thought to be benign fibroid tumors.
Endometrial biopsy
In this procedure, a very thin, flexible tube is put into the uterus through the cervix. Then, using suction, a small sample or amount of the uterine lining (endometrium) is taken out through the tube. Suctioning takes about a minute or less and may be done more than once to get enough tissue. The discomfort is a lot like severe menstrual cramps and can be helped by taking a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug like ibuprofen an hour before the biopsy, if approved by your doctor. This procedure is usually done in the doctor's office.
Hysteroscopy
This procedure allows doctors to look inside the uterus. A thin long camera (called a hysteroscope) that is either soft and flexible or rigid is put into the uterus through the cervix. To get a better view, the uterus is then expanded by filling it with salt water (saline) or gas. This lets the doctor see and take out anything that looks abnormal, such as a cancer or a polyp, or take a tissue sample (biopsy). If the doctor is just taking a look, this procedure can be done with the patient awake, using local anesthesia (numbing medicine). But if a lot of tissue, a polyp, or a mass has to be removed, general or regional anesthesia is used. (General anesthesia means you are given drugs that put you into a deep sleep and keep you from feeling pain. Regional anesthesia is a nerve block that numbs one area of the body).
Dilation and curettage (D & C)
If an endometrial biopsy is not possible or the results of the endometrial biopsy are not clear (meaning they can't tell for sure if there is cancer), a procedure called dilation and curettage (D&C) is usually done. A D&C is a surgical procedure that is usually done in the outpatient surgery area of a clinic or hospital. It's done while the woman is under general or regional anesthesia or conscious sedation (medicine is given into a vein to make her drowsy). In a D&C, the cervix is dilated (opened) and a special surgical tool is used to remove the endometrial tissue from inside the uterus so it can be checked in the lab. A hysteroscopy may be done as well. ﻿Some women have mild-to-moderate cramping and discomfort after this procedure.
Cystoscopy and proctoscopy
If a woman has signs or symptoms that suggest uterine sarcoma has spread to the bladder or rectum, imaging can help to confirm this. Rarely, a camera or lighted tube might be used to look inside of these organs. These exams are called cystoscopy (to look in the bladder) and proctoscopy (to look in the rectum), and might be done only if imaging is not helpful.
Lab tests of biopsy and other samples
Any tissue or biopsy samples are looked at closely in the lab to see if there is cancer. If cancer is found, the lab report will say if it's a carcinoma or sarcoma, what type it is, and its grade.
Tumor grade
Cancer cells are given a grade when they are removed from the body and checked in the lab. The grade is based on how much the cancer cells look like normal cells. The grade is used to help predict your outcome (prognosis) and to help figure out what treatments might work best.

A low-grade number usually means the cancer is slower-growing and less likely to spread.
A high-grade number means a faster-growing cancer that’s more likely to spread.

For example, high-grade sarcomas tend to grow and spread faster than low-grade sarcomas.
Hormone receptor status
The tissue sample or biopsy might also be tested to see if the cancer cells have estrogen receptors and progesterone receptors. These hormone receptors are found on many endometrial stromal sarcomas and some leiomyosarcomas. Cancers with estrogen receptors are more likely to grow with estrogen, while those with progesterone receptors often don't grow if exposed to progesterone. These cancers may stop growing (or even shrink) when treated with certain hormone drugs. Hormone drugs may also be used to prevent the cancer from coming back after initial treatment (recurrence) if the cancer is found to have estrogen or progesterone receptors. Checking for these receptors helps predict which cancers might benefit from hormone treatment.
Imaging tests
Transvaginal ultrasound
Ultrasound tests use sound waves to take pictures of parts of the body. For a transvaginal ultrasound, a probe that gives off sound waves is put into the vagina. The sound waves are used to make images of the uterus and other pelvic organs. These images can often show if there's a tumor or lump and if it invades the myometrium (muscle layer of the uterus).
For an sonohysterogram or saline infusion sonogram, salt water (saline) is put into the uterus through a small tube before or during the transvaginal ultrasound. This lets the doctor see changes in the uterine lining more clearly.
Computed tomography
The CT scan is an x-ray test that makes detailed cross-sectional images of your body. CT scans are rarely used to diagnose uterine sarcoma, but they might be helpful in seeing if the cancer has spread to other organs.
CT-guided needle biopsy: CT scans can also be used to guide a biopsy needle exactly into an abnormal area or tumor. For this procedure, the patient remains on the CT scanning table while the doctor moves a biopsy needle through the skin and toward the tumor. CT scans are repeated until the needle is inside the tumor. A needle biopsy sample is then removed and looked at closely in the lab. This isn’t done to biopsy tumors inside the uterus, but might be used to biopsy areas that look like metastasis (cancer spread).
Magnetic resonance imaging
MRI scans also make cross-section pictures of your insides but use radio waves and strong magnets instead of x-rays. An MRI scan can help tell if a uterine tumor looks like cancer, but a biopsy is still needed to tell for sure. It can also help find out if any cancer has been left behind after surgery or if the cancer has grown into nearby structures which can help in making a treatment plan.
MRI scans are also very helpful in looking for cancer that has spread to the brain and spinal cord.
Positron emission tomography scan
In a PET scan, a slightly radioactive form of sugar (known as FDG) is injected into the blood and collects mainly in cancer cells.
PET/CT scan: Often a PET scan is combined with a CT scan using a special machine that can do both at the same time. This lets the doctor compare areas of higher radioactivity on the PET scan with a more detailed picture on the CT scan. 
                    

                      
                    

                     PET/CT scans can be useful for p atients with uterine sarcomas, if your doctor thinks the cancer might have spread but doesn’t know where.﻿
                    
Chest x-ray
An x-ray of the chest might be done to see if a uterine sarcoma has spread to the lungs and as part of the testing before surgery. If something suspicious is seen, your doctor may order more tests.After a woman is diagnosed with uterine sarcoma, doctors will try to figure out if it has spread, and if so, how far. This process is called staging. The stage of a cancer describes the amount of cancer spread in the body and helps determine  how best to treat it. Doctors also use a cancer's stage when talking about survival statistics.
Uterine sarcoma stages range from stage I (1) through IV (4). As a rule, the lower the number, the less the cancer has spread. A higher number, such as stage IV, means cancer has spread more. And sometimes, a stage might be divided further using letters. An earlier letter means a lower stage. Although each person’s cancer experience is unique, cancers with similar stages tend to have a similar outlook and are often treated in much the same way.
How is the stage determined?
The systems used to stage uterine sarcoma, the FIGO (International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics) system and the (AJCC) American Joint Committee on Cancer TNM staging system are basically the same.
They both stage (classify) this cancer based on 3 factors:

The extent (size) of the tumor (T): How large is the cancer? Has the cancer grown out of the uterus into the pelvis or organs such as the bladder or rectum?
The spread to nearby lymph nodes (N): Has the cancer spread to nearby lymph nodes?
The spread (metastasis) to distant sites (M): Has the cancer spread to distant lymph nodes or organs?

Numbers or letters after T, N, and M provide more details about each of these factors. Higher numbers mean the cancer is more advanced. Once a person’s T, N, and M categories have been determined, this information is combined in a process called stage grouping to assign an overall stage.
The staging system in the table below uses the pathologic stage (also called the surgical stage). It is determined by examining tissue removed during an operation. Sometimes, if surgery is not possible, the cancer will be given a clinical stage instead. This is based on the results of a physical exam, biopsy, and imaging tests done without surgery. For more information see Cancer Staging. 
The system described below is the most recent AJCC system, effective January 2018. It is only for staging leiomyosarcoma and endometrial stromal sarcoma.
Uterine sarcoma staging can be complex, so ask your doctor to explain it to you in a way you understand.



Stage
Stage grouping
FIGO Stage
Stage description*


I
T1 N0 M0
I
The cancer is growing in the uterus, but has not started growing outside the uterus. It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes (N0) or to distant sites (M0).


IA
T1a N0 M0
IA
The cancer is only in the uterus and is no larger than 5 cm across (about 2 inches) (T1a). It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes (N0) or to distant sites (M0).


IB
T1b N0 M0
IB
The cancer is only in the uterus and is larger than 5 cm across (about 2 inches). (T1b). It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes (N0) or to distant sites (M0).


  II  
T2 N0 M0
II
The cancer is growing outside the uterus but is not growing outside of the pelvis (T2). It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes (N0) or to distant sites (M0).  


IIIA
T3a N0 M0
IIIA
The cancer is growing into tissues of the abdomen in one place only (T3a). It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes (N0) or to distant sites (M0).    


IIIB
T3b N0 M0
IIIB
The cancer is growing into tissues of the abdomen in 2 or more places (T3b). It has not spread to nearby lymph nodes (N0) or to distant sites (M0).  


IIIC
T1-T3 N1 M0
IIIC
The cancer is growing in the body of the uterus and it might have spread into tissues of the abdomen, but is not growing into the bladder or rectum (T1 to T3). The cancer has spread to nearby lymph nodes (N1), but not to distant sites (M0).


IVA
T4 Any N M0
IVA
The cancer has spread to the rectum or urinary bladder (T4). It might or might not have spread to nearby lymph nodes (Any N) but has not spread to distant sites (M0).


IVB
Any T Any N M1
IVB
The cancer has spread to distant sites such as the lungs, bones, or liver (M1). The cancer in the uterus can be any size and may or may not have grown into tissues in the pelvis and/or abdomen (including the bladder or rectum) (any T) and it might or might not have spread to nearby lymph nodes (Any N).




                      
                    
* The following additional categories are not listed on the table above:

TX: Main tumor cannot be assessed due to lack of information.
T0: No evidence of a primary tumor.
NX: Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed due to lack of information.Survival rates can give you an idea of what percentage of people with the same type and stage of cancer are still alive a certain amount of time (usually 5 years) after they were diagnosed. They can’t tell you how long you will live, but they may help give you a better understanding of how likely it is that your treatment will be successful.
Keep in mind that survival rates are estimates and are often based on previous outcomes of large numbers of people who had a specific cancer, but they can’t predict what will happen in any particular person’s case. These statistics can be confusing and may lead you to have more questions. Ask your doctor how these numbers might apply to you.  
What is a 5-year relative survival rate?
A relative survival rate compares people with the same type and stage of uterine sarcoma to people in the overall population. For example, if the 5-year relative survival rate for a specific stage of uterine sarcoma is 90%, it means that people who have that cancer are, on average, about 90% as likely as people who don’t have that cancer to live for at least 5 years after being diagnosed.
Where do these numbers come from?
The American Cancer Society relies on information from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) database, maintained by the National Cancer Institute (NCI), to provide survival statistics for different types of cancer.
The SEER database tracks 5-year relative survival rates for uterine sarcoma in the United States, based on how far the cancer has spread. The SEER database, however, does not group cancers by FIGO or AJCC TNM stages (stage 1, stage 2, stage 3, etc.). Instead, it groups cancers into localized, regional, and distant stages:

Localized: There is no sign the cancer has spread outside of the uterus.
Regional: The cancer has spread outside the uterus to nearby structures or lymph nodes.
Distant:  The cancer has spread to distant parts of the body such as the lungs, liver, or bones.

5-year relative survival rates for uterine sarcoma
These numbers are based on women diagnosed with uterine sarcoma between 2012 and 2018. These survival rates differ based on type of uterine sarcoma (leiomyosarcoma, undifferentiated sarcoma, endometrial stromal sarcoma - low grade).
Leiomyosarcoma



SEER* Stage
5-Year Relative Survival Rate


Localized
60%


Regional
37%


Distant
12%


All SEER stages combined
38%



Undifferentiated sarcoma



SEER* Stage 
5-Year Relative Survival Rate


Localized
71%


Regional
37%


Distant
18%


All SEER stages combined
43%



Endometrial stromal sarcoma - low grade*



SEER* Stage 
5-Year Relative Survival Rate


Localized
>99.5%


Regional
94%


Distant
8﻿0%


All SEER stages combined
96%



*The outlook for high-grade endometrial stromal sarcoma tends to be much worse than for low-grade endometrial stromal sarcoma, and is more likely to be similar to that for undifferentiated sarcoma (see table above).
*SEER=Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results
Understanding the numbers

These numbers apply only to the stage of the cancer when it is first diagnosed. They do not apply later on if the cancer grows, spreads, or comes back after treatment.
These numbers don’t take everything into account. Survival rates are grouped based on how far the cancer has spread, but your age, overall health, tumor grade, tumor type, how well the cancer responds to treatment, and other factors can also affect your outlook.
People being diagnosed with uterine sarcoma now may have a better outlook than these numbers show. Treatments improve over time, and these numbers are based on people who were diagnosed and treated at least five years earlier.It is important for you to have honest, open discussions with your cancer care team. They want to answer all of your questions to help you make informed treatment and life decisions. Here are some questions to consider.
When you're told you have uterine sarcoma

What type and grade of uterine sarcoma do I have?
Has the cancer spread outside my uterus?
What is the stage of my cancer and what does that mean for me?
Do I need to see a specialist?
What should I do to be ready for treatment?
What risks or side effects should I expect?
What are the chances my cancer will come back with the treatment options we have discussed?
What is my prognosis (outlook), based on what you know about my cancer?

When deciding on a treatment plan

What are my treatment choices?
What treatment do you recommend and why?
How much experience do you have treating this type of cancer?
Should I get a second opinion? How do I do that? Can you recommend someone?
Is there a clinical trial that you would recommend for me?
What would the goal of the treatment be?
How quickly do I need to decide on treatment?
What should I do to be ready for treatment?
How long will treatment last? What will it be like? Where will it be done?
What risks or side effects are there to the treatments you suggest? Are there things I can do to reduce these side effects?
How might treatment affect my daily activities?
Will the treatment put me into menopause early?
Will I need hormone replacement therapy after treatment? If so, is it safe? What are the chances my cancer will recur (come back) with these treatment plans?
What will we do if the treatment doesn’t work or if the cancer comes back?
Will I be able to have children after my treatment?
What are my treatment options if I want to have children in the future?

During treatment
Once treatment begins, you’ll need to know what to expect and what to look for. Not all of these questions may apply to you, but asking the ones that do may be helpful.

How will we know if the treatment is working?
Is there anything I can do to help manage side effects?
What symptoms or side effects should I tell you about right away?
How can I reach your team on nights, holidays, or weekends?
Do I need to change what I eat during treatment?
Are there limits on what I can do?
Can I have sex during treatment? Will my sex life change after treatment?
What kind of exercise should I do, and how often?
Can you suggest a mental health professional I can see if I start to feel overwhelmed, depressed, or distressed?

After treatment

Will I need a special diet after treatment?
Are there any limits on what I can do?
What other symptoms should I watch for?
What kind of exercise should I do now?
What type of follow-up will I need after treatment?
How often will I need to have follow-up exams and imaging tests?
Will I need any blood tests?
How will we know if the cancer has come back? What should I watch for?
What will my options be if the cancer comes back?

Along with these sample questions, be sure to write down some of your own. For example, you might want specific information about recovery times so that you can plan your work schedule. 
Keep in mind that doctors aren’t the only ones who can give you information. Other health care professionals, such as nurses and social workers, can answer some of your questions. To find out more about speaking with your health care team, see The Doctor-Patient Relationship.Surgery is the main treatment for early stage uterine sarcoma. The goal of surgery is to remove all of the cancer in one procedure, and if possible in one piece. This usually means removing the entire uterus with the cervix (total hysterectomy). In some cases, the fallopian tubes, ovaries, and part of the vagina may also need to be removed. Some lymph nodes or other tissue may be taken out as well to see if the cancer has spread outside the uterus. What's done depends on the type and grade of the cancer and how far it has spread. (See How Is Uterine Sarcoma Staged?) The patient's overall health and age are also important factors.
In some cases, tests done before surgery let the doctor plan the operation ahead of time. These tests include imaging studies, like ultrasound, CT scan, or MRI, as well as a pelvic exam, endometrial biopsy, and/or D&C. In other cases, the surgeon has to decide what needs to be done based on what they find during surgery. For example, sometimes there's no way to know for sure that a tumor is cancer until it's removed during surgery.
Total hysterectomy
This surgery removes the whole uterus (the body of the uterus and the cervix). The loose connective tissue around the uterus (called the parametrium), the tissue connecting the uterus and sacrum (the uterosacral ligaments), and the vagina are not removed. Removing the ovaries and fallopian tubes is not part of a hysterectomy -- officially it's a separate procedure known as a bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (BSO). The BSO is often done along with a hysterectomy in the same operation (see below).
If the uterus is removed through an incision (cut) in the front of the abdomen (belly), the surgery is called an abdominal hysterectomy. When the uterus is removed through the vagina, it's called a vaginal hysterectomy. When it is removed through small incisions on the belly using a laparoscope it is called a laparoscopic hysterectomy. A laparoscope is a thin lighted tube with a video camera at the end. It can be put into the body through a small incision in the abdomen and lets the doctor see inside the body without making a big incision. The doctor can use long, thin tools that are put in through other small incisions to operate. A laparoscope is sometimes used to help remove the uterus when the doctor is doing a vaginal hysterectomy. This is called a laparoscopic assisted vaginal hysterectomy. The uterus can also be removed through the abdomen with a laparoscope, sometimes with a robotic approach, in which the surgeon sits at a control panel in the operating room and moves robot arms to operate. Laparoscopic procedures have shorter recovery times than abdominal hysterectomies, but are not possible to all patients. Talk with your surgeon about how the surgery will be done and why it's the best plan for you.
If lymph nodes or other organs need to be seen, removed, or tested, this can be done through the same incision as the abdominal hysterectomy or laparoscopic hysterectomy. If a hysterectomy is done through the vagina, lymph nodes can be removed after the hysterectomy by using a laparoscope. 
Either general or regional anesthesia is used for the procedure. This means that the patient is in a deep sleep or is sedated and numb from the waist down.
For an abdominal hysterectomy the hospital stay is usually 3 to 5 days. Complete recovery takes about 4 to 6 weeks. Someone who gets a laparoscopic procedure or vaginal hysterectomy can usually go home the same day as the surgery and recovery often takes 2 to 3 weeks.
After a hysterectomy, a woman cannot become pregnant and give birth to children. Surgical complications are rare but could include bleeding, wound infection, and damage to the urinary (bladder and/or ureters) or bowel systems.
Radical hysterectomy
This operation removes the entire uterus as well as the tissues next to the uterus and cervix (parametrium and uterosacral ligaments) and the upper part of the vagina (near the cervix). This operation is not often used for uterine sarcomas, but may be needed if the tumor appears to have spread to the nearby tissues.
Radical hysterectomy is most often done through an abdominal surgical incision or with a laparoscope, with or without a robotic approach (in which the surgeon sits at a control panel in the operating room and moves robot arms to operate) but it can also be done through the vagina. Most people having a radical hysterectomy also have some lymph nodes removed, either through the abdominal incision or with a laparoscope. A radical hysterectomy is done using general anesthesia.
Because more tissue is removed by a radical hysterectomy than with a total hysterectomy, the hospital stay might be longer.
After this surgery, a person cannot become pregnant and give birth to children.
Complications associated with a radical hysterectomy can include bleeding, wound infection, and damage to the urinary (bladder and/or ureters) or bowel systems. If some of the nerves of the bladder are damaged, a catheter is often needed to empty the bladder for some time after surgery. This usually gets better with time and the catheter can be taken out later.
Bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (BSO)
This operation removes both fallopian tubes and both ovaries. In treating uterine sarcomas, this operation is usually done at the same time the uterus is removed. If both of your ovaries are removed, you will go into menopause if you have not done so already.
Lymph node surgery
Sometimes during surgery it looks like the cancer might have spread outside the uterus or nearby lymph nodes look swollen on imaging tests. In this case, your surgeon might do a lymph node dissection or a lymph node sampling, which removes lymph nodes in the pelvis and/or those around the aorta (the main artery that runs from the heart down along the back of the abdomen and pelvis). These lymph nodes are then checked in the lab to see if they have cancer cells. If cancer is found in the lymph nodes, it means that the cancer has already spread outside the uterus. Cancer in the lymph nodes is often associated with a poorer prognosis (outlook).
This operation is done through the same surgical incision in the abdomen as the abdominal hysterectomy or laparoscopic hysterectomy. If a vaginal hysterectomy has been done, the lymph nodes can be removed with laparoscopic surgery.
While some people might have their lymph nodes removed during surgery for uterine sarcoma, it is still not known if this improves their outlook (unless the nodes have cancer cells in them). Studies are being done to help answer this question. 
A side effect of removing lymph nodes in the pelvis can lead to a build-up of fluid in the legs, called lymphedema. This is more likely if radiation is given after surgery. You can find out more about this in Lymphedema.
Other procedures that may be done during surgery

Omentectomy: The omentum is a layer of fatty tissue that covers the abdominal contents like an apron. Cancer sometimes spreads to this tissue. When this tissue is removed, its called an omentectomy. The omentum is sometimes removed at the same time the hysterectomy is done if cancer has spread there, or as a part of staging.
Peritoneal biopsies: The tissue lining the pelvis and abdomen is called the peritoneum. Peritoneal biopsies remove small pieces of this lining to check for cancer cells.
Pelvic washings: In this procedure, the surgeon "washes" the abdominal and pelvic cavities with salt water (saline), collects it, and then sends the fluid to the lab to see if it s has cancer cells.
Tumor debulking: If cancer has spread throughout the abdomen, the surgeon may attempt to remove as much of the tumor as possible. This is called debulking. For some types of cancer, debulking can help other treatments (like radiation or chemotherapy) work better.

Sexual impact of surgery
If you are premenopausal, removing your uterus stops menstrual bleeding (periods). If your ovaries are also removed, you will go into menopause. This can lead to vaginal dryness and pain during sex. These symptoms can be improved with non-hormonal treatments or in some cases, estrogen treatment.Estrogen treatment isn't safe for all women with uterine sarcoma.
While physical and emotional changes can affect the desire for sex, these surgical procedures do not prevent a woman from feeling sexual pleasure. A woman does not need ovaries or a uterus to have sex or reach orgasm. Surgery can actually improve a woman's sex life if the cancer had caused problems with pain or bleeding during sex. See Sex and the Adult Female with Cancer for more on this.Radiation therapy uses high-energy x-rays or particles to destroy cancer cells or slow their growth.
Radiation might be used to treat uterine sarcoma in these ways:

After surgery (adjuvant radiation) it may help lower the chance of the cancer coming back in the pelvis. It might be done for cancers that are high grade or when cancer cells are found in the lymph nodes. The entire pelvis or part of the pelvis may be treated with external beam radiation therapy (see below). Sometimes the radiation field will also include an area of the abdomen (belly) called the para-aortic field. This is the area around the aorta (the main artery). Brachytherapy (internal radiation) may also be used in some cases after surgery (see below). 
It might be used alone or with chemo as the main treatment if surgery can't be done because of other health problems.
It might be used to treat problems caused by tumor growth, but is not intended to cure the cancer. For instance, radiation can be used to shrink a tumor that's causing pain and swelling by pressing on nearby nerves and blood vessels. This is called supportive or palliative care.

Radiation therapy seems to help keep some uterine sarcomas from coming back after surgery, but there is not enough information to know if it can help someone live longer. 
Types of radiation therapy
Two types of radiation treatments might used for uterine sarcoma:

External beam radiation therapy
Internal radiation therapy or brachytherapy

Sometimes brachytherapy and external beam radiation therapy are used together. How much of the pelvis needs to be exposed to radiation therapy and the type(s) of radiation used depend on the extent of the disease.
External beam radiation therapy
External beam radiation therapy (EBRT) is the more common type of treatment for uterine sarcoma. It focuses radiation from outside the body onto the cancer.
EBRT is much like getting an x-ray, but the radiation is stronger. A machine focuses the radiation on the area with the cancer. The procedure itself is painless, but may cause side effects. Each treatment lasts only a few minutes, but the setup time—getting you into place for treatment—usually takes longer. This therapy is usually given 5 days a week for 4 or 5 weeks. The actual radiation treatment takes less than 30 minutes. Sometimes, a special mold of the pelvis and lower back is custom-made to be sure the person is in the exact same position for each treatment.
Brachytherapy
Brachytherapy, also known as internal radiation, is another way to deliver radiation. Instead of aiming radiation beams from outside the body, a device containing radioactive materials is placed inside the body close to the tumor. People treated with this type of radiation are not radioactive after the implant is removed.
After hysterectomy, the tissues in the upper part of the vagina might need to be treated. In this situation, the radioactive material is put into the vagina. This is called vaginal brachytherapy.
When vaginal brachytherapy is needed, treatment is done in the radiation suite of the hospital or treatment center. About 6 to 8 weeks after the hysterectomy, the surgeon or radiation oncologist puts a special cylinder (applicator) into the vagina. The length of the cylinder (and the amount of the vagina treated) can vary, but the upper part of the vagina is always treated. Pellets of radioactive material are then put into the applicator. With this treatment, nearby structures, like the bladder and rectum, will get less radiation exposure.
There are 2 types of brachytherapy: low-dose rate (LDR) and high-dose rate (HDR).
In LDR brachytherapy, the radiation pellets are usually left in for 1 to 4 days at a time. The patient needs to stay very still to keep the applicator from moving during treatment, so they're usually kept in the hospital on strict bed rest. More than one treatment may be needed.
In HDR brachytherapy, the radiation is more intense. It's given the same way as LDR, but a higher dose of radiation is given over hours ﻿instead of days. Because the applicator is in for a shorter period of time, you can usually go home the same day. For uterine cancers, HDR brachytherapy is often given daily or weekly for a total of about 3 doses.
Side effects of radiation therapy
Short-term side effects
Short-term side effects of radiation therapy include:

Feeling tired (fatigue)
Nausea and vomiting
Loose stools or diarrhea
Bladder irritation
Skin changes
Low blood counts

Skin changes in the treated area can look and feeling sunburned. As the radiation passes through the skin to its target, it might damage the skin cells. This can cause irritation that ranges from mild redness to permanent discoloration or skin darkening. The skin might release fluid, which can lead to infection, so care must be taken to clean and protect the area exposed to radiation.
This same kind of damage that can happen to the skin can happen inside the vagina with brachytherapy. As long as there is not a lot of bleeding, a person can continue to have sex during radiation therapy. But the outer genitals and vagina may become sore and tender to touch, and many choose to stop having sex for a while to let the area heal.
Radiation can also irritate the bladder and may cause problems urinating (peeing). Bladder irritation, called radiation cystitis, can cause discomfort and an urge to urinate frequently.
Almost all side effects can be treated with medicines and many go away over time after treatment ends. If you're having any side effects from radiation, discuss them with your cancer care team. There are things you can do to get relief from these symptoms or prevent them.
Long-term side effects of radiation
Radiation can also cause some side effects that can last a long time.
Radiation therapy might also cause scar tissue to form in the vagina. If the scar tissue makes the vagina shorter or more narrow it's called vaginal stenosis. This can make vaginal sex painful. Stretching the walls of the vagina several times a week can help prevent this problem. This can be done by having sex 3 to 4 times a week or by using a vaginal dilator (a plastic or rubber tube used much like a tampon to stretch out the vagina). Still, vaginal dryness and pain with sex can be long-term problems after radiation. Explore how radiation can impact your sex life for more information on this topic.
Pelvic radiation can damage the ovaries, resulting in premature (early) menopause. But most women being treated for uterine sarcoma have already gone through menopause, either naturally or as a result of surgery to treat the cancer.
Radiation to the pelvis can block fluid drainage from the legs, leading to leg swelling. This is called lymphedema. It's more common in those who had lymph nodes removed during surgery.
Pelvic radiation can also weaken bones, leading to fractures of the hips or pelvic bones. If you have had pelvic radiation, contact your doctor right away if you have pelvic pain. Such pain might be caused by a fracture, recurrent cancer, or other serious conditions, such as hemorrhagic cystitis (injury to the bladder with blood in the urine) or radiation proctitis (injury to the rectum with blood in the stool).Chemotherapy (chemo) is the use of anti-cancer drugs to treat cancer. The drugs can be taken by mouth﻿ as pills or injected by needle into a vein or muscle. These drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach almost all areas of the body, making this treatment useful for killing cancer cells in most parts of the body. This makes chemo a useful treatment for cancer that has spread outside of the uterus.
Not all women with uterine sarcoma will need chemo, but there are a few situations in which chemo might be recommended:

After surgery (adjuvant therapy) chemo might be used to help keep the cancer from coming back later.
Chemo might be used as the main therapy to treat the cancer if you are unable to have surgery.
Sometimes chemo might be used to control uterine sarcoma that has spread to other parts of the body or come back after surgery. In this case, the goal may be to ease symptoms and try to keep the tumor from growing.

Chemo may not work for certain types of uterine sarcoma. And some types of uterine sarcoma have been found to respond better to certain drugs and drug combinations. The role of chemo, as well as the best chemo drugs to use are not clear. Still, a lot of clinical trials are looking at this.
Some of the drugs commonly used to treat uterine sarcomas include:



                        Doxorubicin (Adriamycin)
                       


                        Docetaxel (Taxotere)
                       


                        Gemcitabine (Gemzar)
                       


                        Ifosfamide (Ifex)
                       


                        Dacarbazine (DTIC)
                       


                        Vinorelbine (Navelbine)
                       


                        Liposomal doxorubicin (Doxil)
                       


                        Epirubicin (Ellence)
                       


                        Temozolomide (Temodar)
                       


                        Trabectedin (Yondelis)
                       

Sometimes, more than one drug is used. For example, gemcitabine and docetaxel are often used together to treat leiomyosarcoma.
Side effects of chemotherapy for uterine sarcoma
These drugs kill cancer cells but can also damage some normal cells. This is what causes many side effects. Side effects of chemo depend on the specific drugs, the amount taken, and the length of time you are treated.
Many side effects are short-term and go away after treatment is finished, but some can last a long time or even be permanent. It's important to tell your health care team if you have any side effects, as there are often ways to lessen them.
Some common chemo side effects include:

Nausea and vomiting
Loss of appetite
Hair loss
Mouth sores
Feeling tired (fatigue)

Chemo can damage the blood-producing cells of the bone marrow, leading to low blood cell counts. This can cause:

An increased chance of infection from a shortage of white blood cells (neutropenia)
Problems with bleeding or bruising from a shortage of blood platelets (thrombocytopenia)
Feeling tired or short of breath due to low red blood cell counts (anemia)

Some side effects from chemotherapy can last a long time. For example, the drug doxorubicin can damage the heart muscle over time. The chance of heart damage goes up as the total dose of the drug goes up, so doctors limit how much doxorubicin can be given.Hormone therapy is the use of hormones or hormone-blocking drugs to treat cancer. Part of diagnosing uterine sarcoma includes tests that check the cancer cells to see if they have receptors (proteins) where hormones can attach. If they do have these receptors (estrogen and/or progesterone ), hormone treatment might be a good option. Hormone therapy is mainly used to treat low-grade endometrial stromal sarcomas (ESS) and is rarely used for the other types of uterine sarcomas.
Aromatase inhibitors
After the ovaries are removed, or aren't working (after menopause), some estrogen is still made in fat tissue. This becomes the body's main source of estrogen. Drugs called aromatase inhibitors can stop this estrogen from being made. Examples of aromatase inhibitors include letrozole (Femara), anastrozole (Arimidex), and exemestane (Aromasin). These drugs are most often used to treat breast cancer, but they are also helpful in treating low-grade endometrial stromal sarcoma, adenosarcoma, or other sarcomas that have estrogen and/or progesterone receptors.These drugs are only useful for those whose ovaries have been removed or no longer work (like after menopause).
Side effects can include any of the symptoms of menopause, such as hot flashes and vaginal dryness, as well as joint/muscle pain. If they are taken for a long time (years), these drugs can weaken bones, sometimes leading to osteopenia or osteoporosis.﻿
Progestins
Progestins are drugs that act like the hormone progesterone. The progestins used most often to treat estrogen-positive and/or progesterone-positive uterine sarcomas are megestrol (Megace) and medroxyprogesterone (Provera). Both of these drugs are pills you take every day.
Side effects can include increased blood sugar levels in patients with diabetes. Hot flashes, night sweats, and weight gain (from fluid retention and an increased appetite) also occur. Rarely, serious blood clots can happen in people taking progestins.
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GNRH) agonists are drugs used to lower estrogen levels in women who are premenopausal (are still having periods or have not gone through menopause). Before menopause, almost all of a woman's estrogen is made by the ovaries. These drugs keep the ovaries from making estrogen. Examples of GNRH agonists include goserelin (Zoladex) and leuprolide (Lupron). These drugs are given as a shot into a muscle every 1 to 3 months.
Side effects can include any of the symptoms of menopause, such as hot flashes and vaginal dryness. If they are taken for a long time, these drugs can weaken bones, sometimes leading to osteoporosis.Targeted drug therapy uses medicines that target or are directed at proteins on cancer cells that help them grow, spread, and live longer. Research has shown that some uterine sarcomas make certain proteins or have gene changes that can be targeted with specific drugs to destroy cancer cells or slow their growth. Many of these drugs can be taken as pills and their side effects are different from those of chemotherapy (sometimes less severe).
Some targeted drugs, for example, monoclonal antibodies, work in more than one way to control cancer cells and may also be considered immunotherapy because they boost the immune system.
Kinase inhibitors
Kinases are proteins in the cell (or on its surface) that normally send signals to the rest of the cell, such as telling the cell to grow. Drugs that block certain kinases (kinase inhibitors) can help stop or slow the growth of some tumors.
Pazopanib (Votrient) is a targeted drug that might be used to treat a leiomyosarcoma that has spread or come back after treatment. 
Side effects include high blood pressure, diarrhea, nausea, headache, vomiting, and skin changes. More serious side effects can include bleeding in the lung or getting a hole in the bowel.
Targeted therapy is used to treat many types of cancer, but it's still new for treating uterine sarcoma.
TRK inhibitors
Some uterine sarcomas have changes in one of the NTRK genes. This gene change causes them to make abnormal TRK proteins, which can lead to abnormal cell growth and cancer. 
Larotrectinib (Vitrakvi) and entrectinib (Rozlytrek) are drugs that target the TRK proteins. These drugs can be used to treat advanced or recurrent (cancer that has come back) uterine sarcomas with NTRK gene changes.
These drugs are taken as pills, once or twice a day.
Common side effects of TRK inhibitors include muscle and joint pain, cough, dizziness, fatigue, nausea, vomiting, constipation, fever, abdominal pain, and diarrhea.
PARP inhibitors
Olaparib (Lynparza), rucaparib (Rubraca), and niraparib (Zejula) are PARP inhibitors. By blocking the PARP pathway, these drugs make it very hard for tumor cells with an abnormal BRCA gene to repair damaged DNA, which often leads to the death of these cells. If you are not known to have a BRCA mutation, your doctor might test your blood or saliva to be sure you have one before starting treatment with one of these drugs.
Less than 10% of women with uterine leiomyosarcomas will have a BRCA2 mutation. Those that do might benefit from one of these PARP inhibitors.
Olaparib (Lynparza), rucaparib (Rubraca), and niraparib (Zejula) might be used to treat advanced uterine leiomyosarcomas, typically after chemotherapy has been tried. 
All of these drugs are taken daily by mouth, as pills or capsules.Immunotherapy uses medicines to boost a person’s own immune system to recognize and destroy cancer cells more effectively. Immunotherapy typically works on specific proteins involved in the immune system to enhance the immune response. Side effects of these drugs are different from those of chemotherapy.
Some immunotherapy drugs, for example, monoclonal antibodies, work in more than one way to control cancer cells and may also be considered targeted drug therapy because they block a specific protein on the cancer cell to keep it from growing.
Immunotherapy is used to treat some types of uterine sarcomas.
Immune checkpoint inhibitors for uterine sarcomas
An important part of the immune system is its ability to keep itself from attacking normal cells in the body. To do this, it uses proteins (or "checkpoints") on immune cells that need to be turned on (or off) to start an immune response. Drugs that block these checkpoint proteins, (called immune checkpoint inhibitors) might be used to treat some uterine sarcomas.
PD-1 inhibitor
Pembrolizumab (Keytruda) is a drug that targets PD-1 (a protein on immune system T cells that normally helps keep them from attacking other cells in the body). By blocking PD-1, these drugs boost the immune response against cancer cells. This can often shrink tumors or slow their growth.
Pembrolizumab might be an option to treat some advanced uterine sarcomas, typically after other treatments have been tried or when no other good treatment options are available, and if the cancer cells have a high tumor mutational burden (TMB-H), meaning the cancer cells have many gene mutations. The tumor cells can be tested for these gene changes.
This drug is an intravenous (IV) infusion and is typically given every 3 or 6 weeks.
Possible side effects of immune checkpoint inhibitors
Side effects of these drugs can include fatigue, cough, nausea, skin rash, poor appetite, constipation, and diarrhea.
Other, more serious side effects occur less often.
Infusion reactions: Some people might have an infusion reaction while getting these drugs. This is like an allergic reaction, and can include fever, chills, flushing of the face, rash, itchy skin, feeling dizzy, wheezing, and trouble breathing. It’s important to tell your doctor or nurse right away if you have any of these symptoms while getting these drugs.
Autoimmune reactions: These drugs remove one of the protections on the body's immune system. Sometimes the immune system starts attacking other parts of the body, which can cause serious or even life-threatening problems in the lungs, intestines, liver, hormone-making glands, kidneys, or other organs.
It’s very important to report any new side effects to your health care team quickly. If serious side effects do occur, treatment may need to be stopped and you may get high doses of corticosteroids to suppress your immune system.The main treatment for early-stage uterine sarcoma is surgery to remove the uterus, sometimes along with the fallopian tubes and ovaries. In certain cases the lymph nodes might be removed and checked . Surgery might be followed by treatment with radiation, chemotherapy (chemo), or hormone therapy. Targeted drug therapy and immunotherapy might also be used in advanced cancers.
Women who can't have surgery because they have other health problems or because their cancer has spread are treated with radiation, chemo, or hormone therapy. Often some combination of these treatments is used.
Because uterine sarcoma is rare, it's has been hard to study it well. Most experts agree that treatment in a clinical trial when available should be considered for any type or stage of uterine sarcoma.
Leiomyosarcoma and undifferentiated sarcoma
Stages I (1) and II (2)
Most women have surgery to remove the uterus (hysterectomy), as well as the fallopian tubes and ovaries (bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy). The ovaries might not be removed in women who are still having regular menstrual cycles. Pelvic and para-aortic lymph node dissection or laparoscopic lymph node sampling might be done if swollen nodes are seen on imaging tests or felt during the operation. During surgery, organs near the uterus and the thin membrane that lines the pelvic and abdominal cavities (called the peritoneum) are checked to see if the cancer has spread outside the uterus.
Some stage I cancers might not need more treatment after surgery. Observation (being watched closely after surgery) is an option. In other cases, treatment with radiation, with or without chemo, might be needed after surgery if there's a high chance the cancer will come back. This is called adjuvant treatment. The goal of surgery is to take out all of the cancer, but the surgeon can only remove what can be seen. Cancer cells that are too small to be seen can be left behind. Treatments given after surgery can help kill those cancer cells so that they don't get the chance to grow. For leiomyosarcoma (LMS) of the uterus, adjuvant radiation may lower the chance of the cancer growing back in the pelvis (called local recurrence), but it doesn't seem to help people live longer.
Since the cancer can still come back in the lungs or other distant organs, some experts recommend giving chemo after surgery (adjuvant chemotherapy) for stage II cancers. Chemo is sometimes recommended for stage I LMS as well, but it's less clear that it's really helpful. Results from studies using adjuvant chemo have been promising in early-stage LMS, but so far it does not seem to help prolong life. Studies of adjuvant treatment are in progress.
Stage III (3)
Surgery is done when the surgeon feels they can remove all of the cancer. This includes removing the uterus (a hysterectomy), removing both fallopian tubes and ovaries (bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy), other organs that are involved with the tumor, and lymph node dissection or sampling. If the tumor has spread to the vagina, part (or even all) of the vagina will need to be removed as well.
After surgery, treatment with radiation or chemo might be offered to lower the chance that the cancer will come back.
People who are too sick (from other medical problems) to have surgery may be treated with chemotherapy, radiation and/or chemoradiation.
Stage IV (4)
Stage IVA cancers have spread to nearby organs and tissues, such as the bladder or rectum, and maybe to nearby lymph nodes. These cancers might be able to be completely removed with surgery, and this is usually done if possible. If the cancer cannot be removed completely, radiation might be given, either alone or followed with chemo.
Stage IVB cancers have spread outside the pelvis, most often to the lungs, liver, or bone. There's no standard treatment for these cancers. Chemo may be able to shrink the tumors for a time. Radiation therapy, followed by chemo, might also be an option.
These cancers might also be treated with targeted drug therapy or immunotherapy when other treatments don't work.
Endometrial stromal sarcoma
Stages I (1) and II (2)
Early-stage endometrial stromal sarcoma is commonly treated with surgery: hysterectomy (removal of the uterus) with or without bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (removal of both fallopian tubes and both ovaries). Some young women who are still having regular menstrual cycles may be given the option of keeping their ovaries. Pelvic lymph nodes might be removed if they look swollen on imaging tests or feel abnormal during the operation, but this has not been shown to help women live longer.
After surgery, most women with stage I (1) cancer don't need more treatment. These women can be watched closely (observation) for any signs that the cancer has returned. Women with stage II (2) cancers might be treated with hormone therapy and sometimes radiation to the pelvis. These can lower the chances of the cancer coming back, but they have not been shown to help patients live longer. This type of uterine sarcoma does not respond well to chemo, and it's not often used at these early stages.
Women who are too sick (from other medical conditions) to have surgery may be treated with radiation and/or hormone therapy.
Stage III (3)
Surgery is done when the surgeon is able to remove all of the cancer. This includes removing the uterus (a hysterectomy), as well as removing both fallopian tubes and ovaries (bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy). Lymph nodes may be removed if they look swollen. If the tumor has spread to the vagina, part (or even all) of the vagina will need to be removed too.
Women with endometrial stromal sarcomas might get radiation, hormone therapy, or both after surgery. Chemo may be used if other treatments don't work.
Women who are too sick (from other medical conditions) to have surgery may be treated with radiation, chemo, and/or hormone therapy.
Stage IV (4)
Stage IVA cancers have spread to nearby organs and tissues, such as the bladder or rectum. These cancers may be able to be completely removed with surgery, and this is usually done if possible. If all of the cancer cannot be removed, radiation might be given, either alone or followed by chemo. Hormone therapy is also an option.
Stage IVB cancers have spread outside of the pelvis, most often to the lungs, liver, or bone. Hormone therapy can help. Chemo and radiation are also options to help ease symptoms. Targeted drug therapy and immunotherapy might also be recommended depending on certain features of the cancer. 
Recurrent uterine sarcoma
If a cancer comes back after treatment, it's called recurrent cancer. If it comes back in the same place as it was before, it's called a local recurrence. For uterine sarcoma, the cancer growing back as a tumor in the pelvis would be a local recurrence. If it comes back in another part of the body, like the liver or lungs, it's called a distant recurrence.
If uterine sarcoma recurs, it often comes back in the first few years after treatment.
Treatment options for recurrent uterine sarcoma are the same as those for stage IV (4) cancers. If the cancer can be removed, surgery might be done. If not already given, radiation might be used to reduce the size of the tumor and relieve the symptoms of large pelvic tumors. Chemotherapy, targeted drug therapy, immunotherapy, or hormone therapy are often needed when uterine sarcoma recurs. Easing symptoms caused by cancer is called palliative or supportive care.
 If uterine sarcoma comes back, you might want to take part in a clinical trial (scientific studies of promising treatments) testing new chemo or other treatments.The main treatment for early-stage uterine sarcoma is surgery to remove the uterus, sometimes along with the fallopian tubes and ovaries. In certain cases the lymph nodes might be removed and checked . Surgery might be followed by treatment with radiation, chemotherapy (chemo), or hormone therapy. Targeted drug therapy and immunotherapy might also be used in advanced cancers.
Women who can't have surgery because they have other health problems or because their cancer has spread are treated with radiation, chemo, or hormone therapy. Often some combination of these treatments is used.
Because uterine sarcoma is rare, it's has been hard to study it well. Most experts agree that treatment in a clinical trial when available should be considered for any type or stage of uterine sarcoma.
Leiomyosarcoma and undifferentiated sarcoma
Stages I (1) and II (2)
Most women have surgery to remove the uterus (hysterectomy), as well as the fallopian tubes and ovaries (bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy). The ovaries might not be removed in women who are still having regular menstrual cycles. Pelvic and para-aortic lymph node dissection or laparoscopic lymph node sampling might be done if swollen nodes are seen on imaging tests or felt during the operation. During surgery, organs near the uterus and the thin membrane that lines the pelvic and abdominal cavities (called the peritoneum) are checked to see if the cancer has spread outside the uterus.
Some stage I cancers might not need more treatment after surgery. Observation (being watched closely after surgery) is an option. In other cases, treatment with radiation, with or without chemo, might be needed after surgery if there's a high chance the cancer will come back. This is called adjuvant treatment. The goal of surgery is to take out all of the cancer, but the surgeon can only remove what can be seen. Cancer cells that are too small to be seen can be left behind. Treatments given after surgery can help kill those cancer cells so that they don't get the chance to grow. For leiomyosarcoma (LMS) of the uterus, adjuvant radiation may lower the chance of the cancer growing back in the pelvis (called local recurrence), but it doesn't seem to help people live longer.
Since the cancer can still come back in the lungs or other distant organs, some experts recommend giving chemo after surgery (adjuvant chemotherapy) for stage II cancers. Chemo is sometimes recommended for stage I LMS as well, but it's less clear that it's really helpful. Results from studies using adjuvant chemo have been promising in early-stage LMS, but so far it does not seem to help prolong life. Studies of adjuvant treatment are in progress.
Stage III (3)
Surgery is done when the surgeon feels they can remove all of the cancer. This includes removing the uterus (a hysterectomy), removing both fallopian tubes and ovaries (bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy), other organs that are involved with the tumor, and lymph node dissection or sampling. If the tumor has spread to the vagina, part (or even all) of the vagina will need to be removed as well.
After surgery, treatment with radiation or chemo might be offered to lower the chance that the cancer will come back.
People who are too sick (from other medical problems) to have surgery may be treated with chemotherapy, radiation and/or chemoradiation.
Stage IV (4)
Stage IVA cancers have spread to nearby organs and tissues, such as the bladder or rectum, and maybe to nearby lymph nodes. These cancers might be able to be completely removed with surgery, and this is usually done if possible. If the cancer cannot be removed completely, radiation might be given, either alone or followed with chemo.
Stage IVB cancers have spread outside the pelvis, most often to the lungs, liver, or bone. There's no standard treatment for these cancers. Chemo may be able to shrink the tumors for a time. Radiation therapy, followed by chemo, might also be an option.
These cancers might also be treated with targeted drug therapy or immunotherapy when other treatments don't work.
Endometrial stromal sarcoma
Stages I (1) and II (2)
Early-stage endometrial stromal sarcoma is commonly treated with surgery: hysterectomy (removal of the uterus) with or without bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (removal of both fallopian tubes and both ovaries). Some young women who are still having regular menstrual cycles may be given the option of keeping their ovaries. Pelvic lymph nodes might be removed if they look swollen on imaging tests or feel abnormal during the operation, but this has not been shown to help women live longer.
After surgery, most women with stage I (1) cancer don't need more treatment. These women can be watched closely (observation) for any signs that the cancer has returned. Women with stage II (2) cancers might be treated with hormone therapy and sometimes radiation to the pelvis. These can lower the chances of the cancer coming back, but they have not been shown to help patients live longer. This type of uterine sarcoma does not respond well to chemo, and it's not often used at these early stages.
Women who are too sick (from other medical conditions) to have surgery may be treated with radiation and/or hormone therapy.
Stage III (3)
Surgery is done when the surgeon is able to remove all of the cancer. This includes removing the uterus (a hysterectomy), as well as removing both fallopian tubes and ovaries (bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy). Lymph nodes may be removed if they look swollen. If the tumor has spread to the vagina, part (or even all) of the vagina will need to be removed too.
Women with endometrial stromal sarcomas might get radiation, hormone therapy, or both after surgery. Chemo may be used if other treatments don't work.
Women who are too sick (from other medical conditions) to have surgery may be treated with radiation, chemo, and/or hormone therapy.
Stage IV (4)
Stage IVA cancers have spread to nearby organs and tissues, such as the bladder or rectum. These cancers may be able to be completely removed with surgery, and this is usually done if possible. If all of the cancer cannot be removed, radiation might be given, either alone or followed by chemo. Hormone therapy is also an option.
Stage IVB cancers have spread outside of the pelvis, most often to the lungs, liver, or bone. Hormone therapy can help. Chemo and radiation are also options to help ease symptoms. Targeted drug therapy and immunotherapy might also be recommended depending on certain features of the cancer. 
Recurrent uterine sarcoma
If a cancer comes back after treatment, it's called recurrent cancer. If it comes back in the same place as it was before, it's called a local recurrence. For uterine sarcoma, the cancer growing back as a tumor in the pelvis would be a local recurrence. If it comes back in another part of the body, like the liver or lungs, it's called a distant recurrence.
If uterine sarcoma recurs, it often comes back in the first few years after treatment.
Treatment options for recurrent uterine sarcoma are the same as those for stage IV (4) cancers. If the cancer can be removed, surgery might be done. If not already given, radiation might be used to reduce the size of the tumor and relieve the symptoms of large pelvic tumors. Chemotherapy, targeted drug therapy, immunotherapy, or hormone therapy are often needed when uterine sarcoma recurs. Easing symptoms caused by cancer is called palliative or supportive care.
 If uterine sarcoma comes back, you might want to take part in a clinical trial (scientific studies of promising treatments) testing new chemo or other treatments.Completing treatment can be both stressful and exciting. You will be relieved to finish treatment, yet it’s hard not to worry about cancer coming back. This is a very common if you’ve had cancer.
For some, the cancer will never go away completely. Some people may continue to get chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or other treatments to try and control the cancer for as long as possible. Learning to live with cancer that does not go away can be difficult and very stressful. 
Follow-up care
When treatment ends, your doctors will still want to watch you closely. It's very important to go to all of your follow-up appointments. During these visits, your doctors will ask about any problems you are having and may order exams and lab tests or x-rays and scans to look for signs of cancer or treatment side effects.
Almost any cancer treatment can have side effects. Some may last for a few weeks to months, but others might last a long time. Some side effects might not even show up until years after you have finished treatment. 
It is important to let your cancer care team know about any new changes or problems because they could be caused by the cancer coming back, a new disease, or a second cancer.
Doctor visits
If there are no more signs of uterine sarcoma, many doctors recommend follow-up visits (which might include imaging tests and blood tests) with a physical exam every 3 to 4 months for the first few years after treatment, then every 6 to 12 months for the next few years after that. People who were treated for early-stage cancers may need exams less often. Some doctors may advise different follow-up schedules depending on your risk of the cancer coming back.
Survivors of uterine sarcoma should also follow the American Cancer Society Guidelines for the Early Detection of Cancer, such as those for breast, lung, and colorectal cancer.
 
 
Ask your doctor for a survivorship care plan
Talk with your doctor about developing your survivorship care plan. This plan might include: 

A suggested schedule for follow-up exams and tests
A schedule for other tests you might need in the future, such as early detection (screening) tests for other types of cancer, or tests to look for long-term health effects from your cancer or its treatment
A list of possible late- or long-term side effects from your treatment, including what to watch for and when you should contact your doctor
Diet and physical activity suggestions
Reminders to keep your appointments with your primary care provider (PCP), who will monitor your general health  

Keeping health insurance and copies of your medical records
Even after treatment, it’s very important to keep health insurance. Tests and doctor visits cost a lot, and even though no one wants to think of their cancer coming back, this could happen.
At some point after your cancer treatment, you might find yourself seeing a new doctor who doesn’t know your medical history. It’s important to keep copies of your medical records to give your new doctor the details of your diagnosis and treatment. Learn more in Keeping Copies of Important Medical Records.
Can I lower my risk of uterine sarcoma progressing or coming back?
If you have (or have had) uterine sarcoma, you probably want to know if there are things you can do that might lower your risk of the cancer growing or coming back, such as exercising, eating a certain type of diet, or taking nutritional supplements. Unfortunately, it’s not yet clear if there are things you can do that will help.
Adopting healthy behaviors such as not smoking, eating well, getting regular physical activity, and staying at a healthy weight might help, but no one knows for sure. We do know that these types of changes can have positive effects on your health that can extend beyond your risk of uterine sarcoma or other cancers.
About dietary supplements
So far, no dietary supplements (including vitamins, minerals, and herbal products) have been shown to clearly help lower the risk of uterine sarcoma progressing or coming back. This doesn’t mean that no supplements will help, but it’s important to know that none have been proven to do so.
Dietary supplements are not regulated like drugs in the United States – they don't have to be proven effective (or even safe) before being sold, although there are limits on what they’re allowed to claim they can do. If you’re thinking about taking any type of nutritional supplement, talk to your health care team. They can help you decide which ones you can use safely while avoiding those that might be harmful.
If the cancer comes back
If the cancer does return at some point, your treatment options will depend on where the cancer is, what treatments you’ve had before, and your health. For more information on how recurrent cancer is treated, see Treatment for Uterine Sarcoma, by Type and Stage.
For more general information, see Understanding Recurrence.
Getting emotional support
It is normal to feel depressed, anxious, or worried when cancer is a part of your life. Some people are affected more than others. But everyone can benefit from help and support from other people, whether friends and family, religious groups, support groups, professional counselors, or others. Learn more in Coping With Cancer.
Second cancers after uterine sarcoma treatment
Cancer survivors can be affected by a number of health problems, but often their greatest concern is facing cancer again. If a cancer comes back after treatment it is called a recurrence. But some cancer survivors develop a new, unrelated cancer later. This is called a second cancer. 
Unfortunately, being treated for uterine sarcoma doesn’t mean you can’t get another cancer. People who have had cancer can still get the same types of cancers that other people get. In fact, certain types of cancer and cancer treatments can be linked to a higher risk of certain second cancers.
Survivors of uterine sarcoma can get any type of second cancer, but they have an increased risk of:

Breast cancer
Colon cancer
Rectal cancer
Small intestine cancer
Bladder cancer
Vaginal cancer
Soft tissue cancer
Acute leukemia

Colon and breast cancers are the second cancers seen most often.
The increased risks of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and cancers of the rectum, bladder, and soft tissue seem to be linked to treatment with radiation.
Can I lower my risk of getting a second cancer?
Survivors of uterine sarcoma should follow the American Cancer Society guidelines for the early detection of cancer and stay away from tobacco products. Smoking increases the risk of many cancers.
To help maintain good health, survivors should also:

Get to and stay at a healthy weight
Keep physically active and limit the time you spend sitting or lying down
Follow a healthy eating pattern that includes plenty of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains, and limits or avoids red and processed meats, sugary drinks, and highly processed foods
Not drink alcohol. If you do drink, have no more than 1 drink per day for women or 2 per day for men

These steps may also lower the risk of some other health problems.
See Second Cancers in Adults for more information about causes of second cancers.What is a uterine sarcoma?
Cancer that starts in the muscle wall or the tissue that supports the uterus is called uterine sarcoma. This cancer starts when the cells grow out of control and crowd out normal cells.
Uterine sarcoma is rare. Many people often mean endometrial cancer when they say uterine cancer. Endometrial cancer is much more common. It starts in the lining of the uterus. It's not the same as uterine sarcoma.
Cancer cells can spread to other parts of the body. When cancer cells do this, it’s called metastasis. Sarcoma cells in the uterus can sometimes travel to lungs or the bone and grow there. The cancer cells in the new place look just like the ones from the uterine sarcoma.
Cancer is always named for the place where it starts. So if uterine sarcoma spreads to the lung (or any other place), it’s still called uterine sarcoma. It’s not called lung cancer unless it starts from cells in the lung.